external_id,title,project_lead_name,co_researchers,institution,province,country,competition_year,award_amount,program,program_type,theme,research_subject,keywords,abstract,duration,source_url
163301,Granzyme B in Hair Follicle Growth,Granville  David J,"Granville, David J; McElwee, Kevin J",University of British Columbia,British Columbia,Canada,200802,99927.0,Catalyst Grant: Skin Diseases and Conditions,Operating Grants,Biomedical,Musculoskeletal Health and Arthritis,Alopecia; Alopecia Areata; Apoptosis; Atherogenesis; Granzyme B; Growth Regulation; Hair Follicles; Hair Growth Cycle,"Hair loss is a common and distressing problem which can affect men, women, and children. There are several different types of baldness including androgenetic alopecia, better known as pattern baldness, and alopecia areata, a condition that involves immune cells targeting hair follicles and causing patchy hair loss. Recent research on patients has suggested that there may be a link between having androgenetic alopecia and susceptibility to having a heart attack. The research groups of Dr Granville, an expert on heart disease, and Dr McElwee, an expert on hair loss, have teamed up to look for the biological factors that could link baldness to increased risk of heart disease.
Our preliminary investigation has suggested that some rodent models susceptible to heart disease are more likely to develop hair loss while models resistant to heart disease have increased hair growth. Equally, a rodent model of alopecia areata is more likely to have heart problems. Biological factors that cause cell death in heart disease, particularly one called granzyme B, also seem to be expressed in hair follicles. We saw levels of granzyme B increased with the development of alopecia areata. These initial observations suggest granzyme B might be a biological link between heart disease and hair loss.
Our proposal involves looking at granzyme B in the skin and how it may alter hair growth. We intend to; 1)determine the expression of granzyme B in hair follicles and how expression changes as hair follicles grow, 2)examine the effects of granzyme B deficiency on normal hair follicle growth, and 3) examine the effects of suppressing granzyme B expression in an alopecia areata disease model. 
We anticipate that increased granzyme B activity is associated with increased hair loss and suppressing it may inhibit hair loss. It is possible that an increased granzyme B action evident in alopecia may reflect an increased granzyme B mediated activity in heart disease development in the same individual.",1 yr 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=163301&lang=en
163302,The role of Periostin in promoting epithelial-myofibroblast transition and avoidance of apoptosis in cutaneous wound healing,O'Gorman  David B,"O'Gorman, David B; Dagnino, Lina",Western University (Ontario),Ontario,Canada,200802,53013.0,Catalyst Grant: Skin Diseases and Conditions,Operating Grants,Biomedical,Musculoskeletal Health and Arthritis,Epithelial-Mesenchymal Transition; Mouse Model; Myofibroblast; Periostin; Scarring And Fibrosis; Wound Healing,"Wound healing abnormalities has been estimated to affect at least 4.5 million people in North America. Normal wound healing is an orderly and efficient process that includes the conversion of cells, commonly referred to as fibroblasts, into myofibroblasts to contract the edges of the wound together. Normally myofibroblasts undergo cell death after the wound is contracted, however in abnormal healing situations such as scarring, myofibroblasts are evident in increased numbers and persist after the wound has healed. In addition to the fibroblasts resident in the dermis, it has recently been suggested that these cells may arise through the conversion of cells in the epidermis into myofibroblasts in the dermis, a process known as epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT). EMT occurs in fetal development and cancer cell formation. Recently, the protein Periostin has come under intense scrutiny in cancer research, where it has been shown to promote EMT and enhance tumor cell persistence. We have previously shown that Periostin is transiently expressed during normal skin wound healing and that it persists in scar tissue. This research proposal will address whether Periostin induces EMT and promotes myofibroblast formation from epidermal cells during normal wound healing. We will also investigate whether Periostin can enhance myofibroblast survival in scar tissue. These studies have the potential to identify Periostin a target for therapies to reduce scar formation and other abnormal wound healing conditions.",1 yr 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=163302&lang=en
163305,Understanding the molecular determinants of shingles,Pearson  Angela,"Pearson, Angela","INRS - (Qu&eacute;bec, QC)",Qu&eacute;bec,Canada,200802,76121.0,Catalyst Grant: Skin Diseases and Conditions,Operating Grants,Biomedical,Musculoskeletal Health and Arthritis,Chicken Pox; Molecular Virology; Post-Herpetic Neuralgia; Shingles; Varicella Zoster Virus; Virus-Host Cell Interaction,"Shingles is a debilitating disease that causes painful and disfiguring blistering skin lesions.  In many afflicted individuals, pain continues for months or years following the illness in the form of post-herpetic neuralgia.  Shingles is caused by varicella zoster virus (VZV).  Initial infection with this virus causes chickenpox, following which the virus persists in the host in a latent form.  However, in many individuals the virus will eventually reactivate causing shingles.  This reactivation is associated with a weakened immune system, and thus is typically found with advancing age, as well as in immunosuppressed individuals.  The availability of an attenuated chickenpox vaccine has resulted in a decrease in the incidence of this disease, and more recently an attenuated vaccine against zoster has entered the market, but in both cases efficacy is incomplete.  In the context of an aging population, even with the recent vaccine advances, the impact of shingles on Canadians can be expected to remain a significant cause of long-term pain, particularly in older individuals.  In order to develop new treatments for shingles, a better understanding of the interactions at the molecular level between the causative agent, VZV, and the host cell is required.  VZV is a member of the neurotropic sub-family of herpesviruses, a group that also includes herpes simplex virus 1 (HSV-1).  As with HSV-1, multiple steps in the life cycle of VZV take place within the nucleus of the cell, including the maintenance of the latent genome and subsequent reactivation from latency.  Our objective in this pilot project is to begin to elucidate how VZV-induced modifications of the host cell nucleus contribute to efficient viral replication.  The results from this project should contribute to a better understanding of the molecular mechanisms of VZV replication and reactivation, information that can then be exploited in the development of new treatment strategies for shingles.",1 yr 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=163305&lang=en
163307,The Biomechanics of Skin Blistering Diseases: A Cellular and Biophysical Approach.,Fudge  Douglas S,"Fudge, Douglas S",University of Guelph,Ontario,Canada,200802,90322.0,Catalyst Grant: Skin Diseases and Conditions,Operating Grants,Biomedical,Musculoskeletal Health and Arthritis,Biomechanics; Biophysics; Epidermolysis Bullosa Simplex; Intermediate Filaments; Keratin; Skin,"Epidermolysis Bullosa Simplex (EB) is a genetic disease characterized by blistering or erosion of the skin. Here we propose to study the physical basis and mechanisms of this disease. Mutations in a variety of structural proteins in skin can give rise to EB, but it is not known exactly how these defects weaken the skin. This proposal focuses on two components of skin cells that have been implicated in EB - keratin intermediate filaments (IF) and desmosomes. Keratin IFs are protein filaments that form a dense network in the cytoplasm and are believed to impart cells with mechanical strength. Mutations in keratin IF genes have been shown to lead to a form of EB known as EB Simplex (EBS). In EBS patients, the IF network in skin cells is defective, which is believed to make them mechanically fragile. Of course a network of keratin IFs alone does not guarantee mechanical strength - the filaments must be anchored to structures that are equally strong. Indeed, IFs are anchored in spot-weld like structures called desmosomes. Together, IFs and desmosomes link skin cells into a tough mechanical continuum. We will conduct two kinds of experiments using both wild type cells and cells expressing mutant keratin IF and desmosomal proteins. In the first, we will mechanically deform skin cells that are adhered to a deformable substrate and assess the effects on cell viability and the structure of the IF network. In the second set of experiments, we will investigate the biomechanics of wild type and mutant IFs using purified IFs. The results of these experiments will provide new insights into the mechanical function of IFs and desmosomes in skin, and the mechanisms by which defects in these structures can lead to human disease. They will also help us develop an in vitro model that we can use to evaluate the efficacy of potential treatments for this debilitating disease.",1 yr 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=163307&lang=en
163312,Manipulating regulatory T cells to control inflammatory skin disease,Dutz  Jan P,"Dutz, Jan P",University of British Columbia,British Columbia,Canada,200802,100000.0,Catalyst Grant: Skin Diseases and Conditions,Operating Grants,Biomedical,Musculoskeletal Health and Arthritis,Autoimmunity; Dendritic Cell; Flow Cytometry; Regulatory T Cell; Ultraviolet Light,"Inflammatory skin disease is common and often debilitating. Examples of chronic and debilitating skin conditions include psoriasis, vitiligo, alopecia areata and graft versus host disease. Regulatory T cells are powerfull inhibitors of inflammation. In this proposal, a team of clinicans and scientists will explore the function and manipulation of regulatory T cells to treat chronic skin disease.",1 yr 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=163312&lang=en
163317,Modèles d'étude nouveaux et polyvalents produits par génie tissulaire pour l'analyse des cancers de la peau,Auger  Fran&ccedil;ois A,"Auger, François A",Universit&eacute; Laval,Qu&eacute;bec,Canada,200802,100000.0,Catalyst Grant: Skin Diseases and Conditions,Operating Grants,Biomedical,Musculoskeletal Health and Arthritis,Cancers; Génie Tissulaire; Maladies De La Peau; Modèles In Vitro; Mélanomes; Peau,"Les maladies de la peau devraient susciter davantage de recherches pour de nouveaux traitements. Les cancers de la peau, et en particulier les mélanomes, font partie des plus graves problèmes en dermatologie.  Le fait que les cas de mélanomes semblent augmenter et qu'ils peuvent rapidement provoquer la formation de métastases rend ce type de cancer une cible importante pour la recherche médicale.  Le processus par lequel des mélanomes se développent et la formation des métastases sont des processus complexes.  La simple culture de cellules permet de décortiquer plusieurs éléments précis mais ne possède pas les autres éléments présents dans la peau.  Les modèles animaux offrent un environnement expérimental complexe mais dans lequel il est parfois difficile de bien isoler l'effet des différents facteurs.  Les substituts cutanés produits par génie tissulaire avec des cellules de peau humaine offrent une solution intermédiaire intéressante en créant un environnement tridimensionnel comportant les principaux éléments de la peau.  Grâce à ce type de modèle plusieurs éléments critiques de maladies de la peau telles que le cancer et le psoriasis, par exemple, pourront être examinés.",1 yr 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=163317&lang=en
167487,Can a mobile falls prevention clinic reduce the risk of falls in community dweling seniors?,Singh  Sonia,"Singh, Sonia; Scott, Vicky J","Fraser Health Authority (Surrey, BC)",British Columbia,Canada,200803,113783.0,Operating Grant: Demonstration Projects in Mobility in Aging,Operating Grants,Health systems / services,Aging,Cohort Study; Cost-Effectiveness; Falls And Injury Prevention; Mobile Clinic; Osteoporosis; Seniors,"An estimated 30 percent of community dwelling individuals over 65 years of age fall at least once each year.  Consequences of falls include fractures, head concussions, bruises, and lacerations. ""Fear of Falling"" results in restricted activity, increased dependency on others and a decrease in social interaction.  The injuries associated with falls in the elderly account for over $1.0 billion in annual health care costs in Canada. 
 
This research study aims to determine if a Mobile Falls Prevention Clinic, traveling to seniors in their own community, would improve access to falls prevention services and prevent falls and falls-related injuries from occurring.  Those seniors that agree to participate in the study will be followed for 12 months during which time they will all undergo the Mobile Falls Prevention Clinic Program.  Each study participant will undergo a special falls risk assessment called the Physiological Profile Assessment during their Mobile Falls Prevention Clinic visit.  This assessment will be repeated 12 months later.  During the 12 month period after the clinic visit, study participants will keep a record of their falls and falls related injuries and check in with study personnel on a monthly basis.   Study participants' medical records will be reviewed for details around falls and falls related injuries.  A cost benefit analysis will take place alongside the study to determine if the Mobile Clinic format is a cost-effective way of delivering falls prevention services.

The Mobile Falls Prevention Clinic has the potential to dramatically improve the lives of elderly seniors by reducing the risk of falling.  Preventing falls and falls related injuries could help keep seniors mobile and community dwelling for as long as possible and prevent or delay long term institutional care.",3 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=167487&lang=en
167488,"Exercise in Older Adults: A demonstration and evaluation of the ""Get Fit for Active Living"" intervention.",Paterson  Donald H,"Paterson, Donald H; Fitzgerald, Clara; Speechley, Mark",Western University (Ontario),Ontario,Canada,200803,341383.0,Operating Grant: Demonstration Projects in Mobility in Aging,Operating Grants,Social / Cultural / Environmental / Population Health,Aging,Behaviour Modification / Adherence; Delayed Catch-Up Research Design; Evaluation; Functional Fitness; Knowledge Translation; Physical Activity For Older Adults,"Policies on physical activity for older adults tend to advocate even minor increases in daily physical activity, on the grounds that any is better than none.  While this may be true, recent evidence suggests that minor increases in activity result in at most minor gains in health. To achieve full benefit of an active lifestyle, a more structured exercise/activity program is required. The program should consist of moderate and vigorous intensity aerobic activity for 30 minutes/day, 4-5 days/week to gain cardiorespiratory fitness, prevent functional decline, and strength and power exercises 2 days/week to maintain muscle mass and performance. Thus, there is a disconnect between best practices, and what is believed by most to be the type and amount of physical activity required by older adults to engender health, functional fitness, and independent living.  Many people begin exercising each year.  In spite of good intentions, a lot of them do not continue to exercise.  Recognizing this problem, the Canadian Centre for Activity and Aging (CCAA) developed an 8-week intervention(""Get Fit for Active Living"", GFAL) that educates older adults about the importance of exercise, and provides experience in developing an exercise routine, which in turn motivates them to maintain the lifestyle.  The rationale was that older adults need ""experiential learning"" while they develop an exercise program, and that with gains in fitness the older adults would experience less fatigue in daily activities and maintain a more active lifestyle. The CCAA has trained over 40 facilitators of this program nationally, and initial pilot work suggests the program indeed fosters adherence to an active lifestyle. Over 3 years, this project will formally evaluate the GFAL program by studying its effect on the functional fitness, quality of life, and enhanced independence of 300 older adult ""Meals on Wheels"" volunteers across Canada, and how effective the uptake of the program is at the community level.",3 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=167488&lang=en
167489,Entraînement physique et stimulation cognitive pour améliorer la mobilité des personnes âgées fragiles,Bherer  Louis,"Bherer, Louis","CIUSSS du Centre-Sud-de-l'&Icirc;le-de-Montr&eacute;al (Montr&eacute;al, Qu&eacute;bec)",Qu&eacute;bec,Canada,200803,189950.0,Operating Grant: Demonstration Projects in Mobility in Aging,Operating Grants,Clinical,Aging,Activité Physique; Cognition; Mobilité; Vieillissement,"L'objectif principal de ce projet de recherche est d'évaluer l'efficacité d'un programme d'entraînement physique combiné à des séances de stimulation cognitive, pour améliorer les capacités physiques et cognitives associées à la mobilité. Le projet vise aussi à vérifier l'impact de ces interventions sur la qualité de vie des personnes âgées légèrement et modérément fragiles. Des personnes âgées seront suivies au Centre de recherche de l'Institut universitaire de gériatrie de Montréal et évaluées par des cliniciens (gériatres, physiothérapeutes, psychologues) qui souhaitent prescrire de l'activité physique à ces personnes. Il est attendu que ce projet de recherche permette une évaluation scientifique rigoureuse de l'efficacité de ces prescriptions et évalue la faisabilité de la mise en place des programmes d'activités physiques et cognitives pour les personnes âgées fragiles.",3 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=167489&lang=en
167490,A Inpatient Rehabilitation Model of Care Targeting Patients with Cognitive Impairment: A demonstration project,McGilton  Katherine S,"McGilton, Katherine S",Toronto Rehabilitation Institute-UHN,Ontario,Canada,200803,362915.0,Operating Grant: Demonstration Projects in Mobility in Aging,Operating Grants,Health systems / services,Aging,Demonstration Project; Non-Equivalent Quasi-Experimental Design; Rehabilitation Of Patients With Cognitive Impairment; Rehabilitation Of Patients With Hip Fractures,"Hip fractures are a danger to an individual's mobility, independence and ability to live in the community.  When patients have a cognitive impairment (such as dementia or delirium) they do not recover as well or go back to their homes as often as those patients who  do not have a cognitive impairment.  Therefore, our team developed a rehabilitation model to care for patients with hip fractures,  and specifically for those patients with CI.  The model of care is called the Patient Centred Rehabilitation Model of Care (PCRM-CI).  This 3 year study will focus on comparing the new model with usual rehabilitation care.  This study will also focus on understanding the factors that could influence the use of the model on new rehabilitation units.   We will collect data in 2 hospitals, 70 patients receiving the usual care and 70 patients receiving the care in the new model.  We will invite 70 staff and their unit managers  as well.  This study will help policy makers to use research findings to make better decisions about care of older Canadians.",3 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=167490&lang=en
168565,Frequency-Selective MRI in Regenerative Medicine,Cunningham  Charles H,"Cunningham, Charles H","Sunnybrook Research Institute (Toronto, Ontario)",Ontario,Canada,200709,400000.0,Peter Lougheed/CIHR New Investigator Canada's Premier Young Researcher,Salary Programs,Biomedical,Circulatory and Respiratory Health,Cell Tracking; Contrast Agents; Magnetic Resonance Imaging; Metabolism; Molecular Imaging; Regenerative Medicine,"Coronary artery disease, leading to chest pain and heart attacks, is the leading cause of death in the developed world. The damaged heart muscle is replaced with scar tissue resulting in diminished ability to pump blood and culminating in heart failure in a third of all patients, even with all the treatments provided by modern medicine. Based on positive results in small animals, there is hope that cell-based therapies using transplants of progenitor cells, such as bone marrow derived in stem cells, will provide a means to reduce the incidence of heart failure by repairing the damaged heart tissue.

In research towards this goal, methods for following the location and studying the activity of these transplanted cells are of utmost importance. Magnetic resonance imaging has shown a great deal of promise for tracking the location of stem cells non-invasively. In the proposed research plan, a novel method for imaging stems cells such that the signal is bright (as opposed to dark with conventional methods) is developed towards application in the clinic.  In a second project component, MRI of hyperpolarized carbon-13, which enables the direct imaging of metabolism using an MRI machine, is studied.  This new method is proposed for studying cellular metabolism in and around damaged heart muscle to better plan and evaluate regenerative therapy.",5 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=168565&lang=en
168880,FIRST for Depression in an EAP: Feasibility of Intervention Research on Stepped-care Treatment for Depression in an Employee Assistance Program.,Lam  Raymond W,"Lam, Raymond W",University Hospital (U.B.C.),British Columbia,Canada,200807,66361.0,Catalyst Grant: Planning &amp; Develop. in Mental Hlth &amp; Addiction in the Workplace,Operating Grants,Clinical,"Neurosciences, Mental Health and Addiction",Cognitive Behaviour Therapy; Depression; Employee Assistance Programs; Qualitative Methods; Rating Scales; Workplace,"Clinical depression and anxiety in employees, managers and executives (workplace depression) is a significant burden to society from both human resource and economic viewpoints. Depression is now a leading cause of absenteeism, short-term and long-term disability, and also contributes significantly to ""presenteeism"" in affected workers. Despite the impact of clinical depression on workplaces, there is little information on the most effective interventions for workers struggling with depression. Employee and family assistance programs (EAPs) are often the ""first line of defence"" for employees coping with stress, depression and anxiety. Our study, ""FIRST for Depression in an EAP"", will focus on screening and early intervention strategies in EAP clients with clinical depression and anxiety. We will pilot test novel types of treatment (for example, computer-assisted or telephone-delivered counseling) in an EAP to find out how acceptable and how satisfactory are these methods for clinicians and clients. We will also address some of the barriers to conducting intervention research in a business and clinical setting such as an EAP. The results from ""FIRST for Depression in an EAP"" will allow us to plan rigorous studies to evaluate interventions within EAPs. The results will also provide new information on the clinical and productivity outcomes of clients with depression and anxiety using EAP services.",1 yr 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=168880&lang=en
168881,Mindfulness-based Cognitive Therapy for the prevention of depressive relapse in the workplace,Lau  Mark A,"Lau, Mark A",University of British Columbia,British Columbia,Canada,200807,73340.0,Catalyst Grant: Planning &amp; Develop. in Mental Hlth &amp; Addiction in the Workplace,Operating Grants,Clinical,"Neurosciences, Mental Health and Addiction",Depression; Employee Assistance Program; Mindfulness-Based Cognitive Therapy; Relapse Prevention; Telehealth; Workplace,"Depression is among the most costly of all health problems to employers. This is particularly true for the health service sector, which typically employs mostly women as depression is twice as prevalent for women as for men.  As a result, these workplaces can demonstrate higher than normal prevalence rates for depression.  For example, in a recent health survey of 10,000 employees of the Provincial Health Services Authority (PHSA), which operates highly specialized health services in British Columbia, over 12% were likely to be experiencing depression.  Importantly, approximately 50% of individuals who recover from an initial episode of depression will develop a second episode, and for those with a history of two or more episodes, the relapse/recurrence risk increases to 70-80%.  To better manage and prevent depression at PHSA, mindfulness-based cognitive therapy (MBCT) has been approved as part of PHSA's Workplace Mental Health & Addiction Strategy to reduce the risk of depressive relapse.  MBCT is a group based treatment that has been shown to be effective in preventing depressive relapse.  However, it remains to be determined how to effectively deliver MBCT in the workplace as some employees may not be interested in participating in a group with other co-workers.  Thus, the goal of this proposal is to evaluate employee preferences and the feasibility of offering MBCT as delivered in four different formats: (1) group MBCT; (2) group MBCT via the internet; (3) individual MBCT; and, (4) individual MBCT via telephone.  In addition, we will evaluate the effectiveness of an MBCT training program for Employee Assistance Program practitioners who will be recruited and trained to provide MBCT.  Our proposed work will help to determine which MBCT delivery format(s) is the most promising for use in the workplace and help prepare our research team/workplace partnership for future studies of implementing MBCT to prevent depressive relapse and improve workplace outcomes.",1 yr 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=168881&lang=en
168882,PREDICTORS OF STRESS AND TRAUMA RESPONSES TO HIGH IMPACT EVENTS IN POLICE DISPATCHERS,Leblanc  Vicki R,"Leblanc, Vicki R; Regehr, Cheryl",University of Toronto,Ontario,Canada,200807,48340.0,Catalyst Grant: Planning &amp; Develop. in Mental Hlth &amp; Addiction in the Workplace,Operating Grants,Social / Cultural / Environmental / Population Health,"Neurosciences, Mental Health and Addiction",Cortisol; Mental Health; Police Dispatchers; Post-Traumatic Stress Symptoms; Predictor Variables; Stress,"Emergency services work is characterized by high stress situations requiring immediate intervention and by exposure to distressing events that are outside the experience of the general public. Dispatchers must cope with a rapid succession of emergency calls, interact with highly distressed callers often over a prolonged period of time, and coordinate interprofessional communications in order to achieve positive outcomes. Furthermore, dispatchers are not physically present at the site of an emergency; they often report feeling isolated and powerless to assist during the emergency and are generally unaware of the resolution of the event. The proposed research project is a pilot study aimed at generating preliminary data regarding the interactions of mental health disruptions, mediating factors, stress responses and performance in an understudied population that is regularly exposed to salient stressors.  In this study, participating dispatch workers will be required to respond to a simulated 9-1-1 call from a member of the public. A number of psychosocial and physical stressors will be added to the scenarios. The participants¿ stress responses (subjective and physiological) will be assessed. Furthermore, a number of potential predictor variables will be assessed in order to determine whether they mediate responses and performance during acute events. The proposed project represents the first study in a developing program of research aimed at understanding the effects of acute stress and trauma on police dispatchers. The findings of this study will be used to inform the design of subsequent research projects aimed at examining how these factors of interest play out in real world scenarios. Furthermore, the results of this project will be crucial in guiding the development of interventions and policies for the support and training of those individuals who routinely encounter acutely stressful events.",1 yr 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=168882&lang=en
168885,Workplace reintegration of Veterans with mental disorders,Pedlar  David J,"Pedlar, David J",University of Prince Edward Island (Charlottetown),Prince Edward Island,Canada,200807,80000.0,Catalyst Grant: Planning &amp; Develop. in Mental Hlth &amp; Addiction in the Workplace,Operating Grants,Health systems / services,"Neurosciences, Mental Health and Addiction",Depression; Mental Health; Military Workforce; Operational Stress Injuries; Post Traumatic Stress Disorder; Veteran,"Workplace Reintegration of Veterans with Mental Disorders

Mental health has special significance in the Canadian military and Veteran (former military) populations. For example, the rate of depression among regular Canadian Forces members is double that of the general population. Military service is demanding both physically and emotionally, and mental illness may be a consequence of military service. Mental disorders are associated with premature discharge from the military. Furthermore, reintegrating into the civilian workplace is difficult for Veterans in Canada, Britain, and the United States.

The primary objective of this proposal is to build a team of experts in workplace reintegration difficulties in Veterans with mental disorders.  Team building is the first phase of an anticipated research program that will provide an understanding of successful reintegration, determined by the interplay of workplace, compensation, health care, and personal factors. 
 
Veterans are an understudied population of about 1 million Canadians. Building this team of experts will provide the first opportunity to expand knowledge on the impact of mental health on workplace reintegration of Veterans. This research team has the potential to 1) direct policy development, as programs for Veteran vocational rehabilitation are evaluated and adjusted, 2) establish important research targets in Veteran workplace mental health, 3) pave the way for intervention research that aims to increase successful reintegration of Veterans into civilian life. We owe a special duty to those who have made sacrifices while serving Canada.",1 yr 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=168885&lang=en
169068,National network for characterization of influenza virus evolution and antiviral drug susceptibility,Boivin  Guy,"Boivin, Guy",Universit&eacute; Laval,Qu&eacute;bec,Canada,200806,0.0,Catalyst Grant: Pandemic Outbreak Team Leader,Operating Grants,Biomedical,Infection and Immunity,Antiviral; Influenza Virus; Phylogeny; Resistance; Viral Evolution,"Influenza A viruses evolve constantly and rapidly leading to seasonal flu epidemics and occasional but devastating flu pandemics. There is thus a need to rapidly identify new emerging influenza strains for rapid development of effective influenza vaccines. In addition, there has been a recent and important increase of influenza resistance to the only two classes of antiviral agents available (adamantanes and neuraminidase (NA) inhibitors) which limit treatment/prophylactic opportunities for infected patients and their contacts.

In this research, we propose to set up a national network for a comprehensive and real-time evaluation of influenza virus evolution and for global antiviral suceptibility assessment. In brief, a panel of influenza A viruses will be collected at 4 geographically-representative Canadian virology laboratories during a major influenza outbreak or in the early phase of a pandemic. The molecular (NA and hemagglutinin (HA) gene sequencing) and antigenic properties of these viruses will be analyzed at a central laboratory. Based on sequence alignments, phylogenetic trees will be constructed to assess viral evolution over time. Similarly, phenotypic (plaque and enzymatic assays) and genotypic methods will be used to evaluate viral susceptibility or resistance to available antiviral agents. All results will be rapidly transmitted to provincial and national public health authorities.

At term, this integrated network will improve public health control measures with more rationale use of antiviral agents and rapid design of effective vaccines in the case of major influenza outbreaks or pandemics.",1 yr 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=169068&lang=en
169070,Catalyst Grant: Pandemic Outbreak Team Leader in Mathematical Modeling,Pourbohloul  Babak,"Pourbohloul, Babak",University of British Columbia,British Columbia,Canada,200806,0.0,Catalyst Grant: Pandemic Outbreak Team Leader,Operating Grants,Social / Cultural / Environmental / Population Health,Infection and Immunity,Contact Network Epidemiology; Human/Avian Influenza; Mathematical Modeling; Pandemic Preparedness Planning; Public Health; Transmission Dynamics,"The threat posed by the emergence of the highly pathogenic strain of influenza A has been met with an 
abundance of preemptive scientific research to prepare for a pandemic. However, it is equally important 
that Canada¿s top researchers are accessible at the advent of a pandemic to adapt and develop public 
health measures as the pandemic progresses. The objective of this application is to bring together the 
required leadership and expertise to create a predictive integrated framework that will strengthen 
Canada¿s pandemic response both at the beginning, as well as throughout the duration of a pandemic.

The threat posed by the emergence of the highly pathogenic strain of influenza A has been met with an 
abundance of preemptive scientific research to prepare for a pandemic. However, it is equally important 
that Canada¿s top researchers are accessible at the advent of a pandemic to adapt and develop public 
health measures as the pandemic progresses. The objective of this application is to bring together the 
required leadership and expertise to create a predictive integrated framework that will strengthen 
Canada¿s pandemic response both at the beginning, as well as throughout the duration of a pandemic.

This application will yield a national network that leverages tremendous expertise in EID modeling and 
positions Canada at the forefront in terms of outbreak research and rational planning for EIDs. With the 
latest mathematical techniques and the most advanced computational technologies at their disposal, this 
team, under the proposed leadership, can significantly improve Canada¿s response to any potential 
threat from emerging infections, both nationally and internationally.",1 yr 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=169070&lang=en
169136,"hereditary cancers (genetics) such as VHL, FAP,",Green  Jane S,"Green, Jane S",Memorial University of Newfoundland,Newfoundland and Labrador,Canada,200805,50000.0,Knowledge Translation Prize,Operating Grants,,,,,1 yr 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=169136&lang=en
169139,late-life suicide prevention toolkit,Heisel  Marnin J,"Heisel, Marnin J",Western University (Ontario),Ontario,Canada,200806,50000.0,Betty Havens Prize,Operating Grants,,,,,1 yr 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=169139&lang=en
169140,Action Schools! childhood inactivity and obesity,Mckay  Heather A,"Mckay, Heather A",University of British Columbia,British Columbia,Canada,200805,50000.0,Knowledge Translation Prize,Operating Grants,,,,,1 yr 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=169140&lang=en
169144,Tele-ophthalmology to improve access to ophthalmologic care in remote areas,Tennant  Matthew T,"Tennant, Matthew T",University of Alberta,Alberta,Canada,200805,100000.0,Knowledge Translation Prize,Operating Grants,,,,,1 yr 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=169144&lang=en
169936,Down Syndrome Research Foundation,Mckenna  Dawn,"Mckenna, Dawn","Down Syndrome Research Foundation (Burnaby, BC)",British Columbia,Canada,200806,25000.0,Partnership Award,Operating Grants,,,,,1 yr 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=169936&lang=en
170018,Physician billing costs attributable to ambiguous genetic tests,Speechley  Mark,"Speechley, Mark; Adams, Paul C",Western University (Ontario),Ontario,Canada,200803,22788.0,"Operating Grant: Genetics (Ethics, Law and Society)",Operating Grants,Social / Cultural / Environmental / Population Health,Genetics,Ambiguous Results; Genetic Tests; Hemochromatosis; Iron Overload; Physician Billings; Social Impact,"The use of genetic tests to identify people who face an increased disease risk is growing in Canada.  The social marketing of gene tests contains two misleading messages: i) the prices for tests are low and will continue to decline; and  ii) gene test results will allow doctors to make highly accurate individual diagnoses and treatment decisions.  These messages are misleading because the price of tests alone ignores social costs such as additional health care utilization, and the clinical utility of most gene tests is far from definitive.  While the message implies genetic certainty, in fact many gene tests will produce ambiguous results.  When combined with phenotypic (i.e. blood) tests, many people will fall in abiguous categories.  In the case of hereditary hemochromatosis, twelve different combinations result.  For two of these combinations, there is sufficient medical evidence to provide people with clear advice to follow-up with their doctor.  A third combination results in no detectable abnormalities, and clear advice that no further follow-up is warranted.  The remaining nine combinations, however, are ambiguous in terms of specific disease risk and appropriate follow-ups.  This study is set up to examine changes in the number and type of visits to physicians as well as increased health care costs in those who received ambiguous screening results in a study of 20,000 Canadians.",1 yr 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=170018&lang=en
170020,Defining Stakeholders Rights and Obligations in Population Biobanks Through Material Transfer Agreements (MTAs),Knoppers  Bartha M,"Knoppers, Bartha M",Universit&eacute; de Montr&eacute;al,Qu&eacute;bec,Canada,200803,18930.0,"Operating Grant: Genetics (Ethics, Law and Society)",Operating Grants,Biomedical,Genetics,Ethics; Genetics; Law; Material Transfer Agreement (Mta); Population Biobanks; Stakeholders,"The implementation of DNA repositories has brought to the forefront certain ethical and legal challenges surrounding genomic research. One such challenge is related to the regulation and control of the ethical and legal obligations of researchers who will utilize these research infrastructures. This project will investigate the possibility for population biobanks to use Material Transfer Agreements (MTAs) as a regulatory tool in promoting the rights of various stakeholders. In the absence of specific legislation addressing the ethical and legal obligations of researchers using population based research infrastructures, MTAs may be able to provide a flexible and efficient alternative. Even though MTAs are widespread within the research sector, they need to be specifically tailored to issues relevant to population biobanks. Thus, this study will focus on how publicly funded infrastructures (DNA repositories) can use a Uniform Material Transfer Agreement (UMTA) to: 1) better define and respect the rights of participants, funding agencies and potential researchers; 2) preserve the open-source approach of publicly funded infrastructures; 3) preserve patentability and licensing of resulting intellectual property; 4) clearly define research limits in light of public purpose and the participant's informed consent; 5) establish national and international transfer modalities for biological samples and data; and 6) define related risks and responsibilities. A proper analysis of these aspects may reveal that MTAs can, at least provisionally, in the absence of specific legislation, be used as a flexible and efficient tool in the context of research infrastructures improving predictability, public protection (and incidentally confidence), decreasing negotiation delays and setting important standards in the field. It is hoped that these proposed standards will influence the private sector as well.",1 yr 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=170020&lang=en
170021,Environmental Scan and Stakeholder Consultation on Electronic Personal Health Records in Canada,Archer  Norman P,"Archer, Norman P; Mckibbon, Kathleen Ann; Straus, Sharon E; Willison, Donald J",McMaster University,Ontario,Canada,200803,75000.0,"Operating Grant: Genetics (Ethics, Law and Society)",Operating Grants,Health systems / services,Health Services and Policy Research,Chronic Care; Elderly Care; Health Self-Management; Home Healthcare; Online Accessibility; Personal Health Records,"The Canadian healthcare system is moving towards a reduction of operating cost by an increased emphasis on caring for the elderly and patients with chronic diseases of all ages at home instead of institutional care.  This requires an increase in the care provided to patients through homecare nursing, personal support workers, and informal care providers (e.g. relatives).  Such care might be provided more effectively if care providers and patients were given online access to the patient's medical records and to educational support in the home environment.  This would mean linking providers with online systems that provide access to relevant records maintained by the patient's doctor, hospital records, pharmacy records, etc.  Records provided to the patient in this way are called electronic personal health records (ePHRs).  Such an approach would parallel the announced philosophy of the Canadian healthcare system to provide electronic health records for all Canadian patients, but with a further extension to patients themselves and their care providers.  Given the complex nature of the computer systems involved, this is not a simple task.  The objective of this proposal is to: 1) carry out a review of ePHRs that summarizes existing implementations and relevant research, and report on benefits and barriers to their use, 2) develop techniques (questionnaires, etc.) that can be used to gather information from a sample of Canadian healthcare practitioners, providers, and patients on their views of ePHRs; gather information, using these techniques, that can help to understand what form ePHRs should take and what education is needed to make use of them by caregivers and their patients, and 3) develop a priority list of the research gaps and capacity needs that have been identified, using information gathered in this study.",1 yr 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=170021&lang=en
170056,Understanding simultaneous polysubstance use: Patterns and consequences of mixing substances in illicit drug users.,Barrett  Sean P,"Barrett, Sean P",Dalhousie University (Nova Scotia),Nova Scotia,Canada,200810,96600.0,Catalyst Grant: Prevention and Treatment of Illicit Substance Use,Operating Grants,Clinical,"Neurosciences, Mental Health and Addiction",Addiction; Drug Abuse; Drug Related Harms; Illicit Susbtance Use; Polysubstance Use; Treatment Outcome,"One issue that may hinder our understanding of illicit drug addiction is the tendency for drug users to administer multiple substances at a time, a phenomenon known as simultaneous polysubstance use (SPU). High rates of SPU have been documented across users of various illicit substances, and evidence suggests that simultaneous use of more than one substance can alter subjective and behavioural responses to the drugs and increase the harmful consequences of use.  However, traditional models for assessing, diagnosing and treating substance use disorders tend to focus on problems associated with individual substances in isolation from one another. The principal applicant has recently developed a structured interview technique to assess patterns of SPU including details regarding order, amount, type and route of administration of all substances administered on specific substance use occasions.  Preliminary results from studies using this method showed that participants were able to reliably recall such details and that certain combinations of substances followed identifiable patterns of co-administration. However, because these studies did not assess the presence or absence of substance related disorders or the harmful consequences of multiple substance use, the clinical significance of these findings remains unknown. The proposed research will examine patterns of SPU in various illicit substance-dependent populations and determine how SPU patterns are associated with substance-related disorders and harms.",1 yr 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=170056&lang=en
170057,Neurobiological basis of the effects of methamphetamine (Crystal  Meth):  a behavioural and electrophysiological study.,Dumont  Eric C,"Dumont, Eric C","Queen's University (Kingston, Ontario)",Ontario,Canada,200810,20750.0,Catalyst Grant: Prevention and Treatment of Illicit Substance Use,Operating Grants,Biomedical,"Neurosciences, Mental Health and Addiction",Bed Nucleus Of The Stria Terminalis; Brain Slices; Methamphetamine (Crystal Meth); Patch-Clamp; Self-Administration; Synaptic Transmission,"In spite of intense efforts in research, as well as clinical and field 
interventions to prevent and treat drug addiction, this health 
problem is still devastating and worse, is still growing. In 
particular, methamphetamine (Crystal Meth) is relatively easy 
and cheap to synthesize: the recipe is available on the internet 
and ingredients can be purchased over the counter at the local 
pharmacy. Most current therapies provide short-term solutions 
to help detoxification and support abstinence. However, the 
main problem in treating or preventing addiction is the long 
lasting, even permanent, neuronal alterations produces by drugs 
of abuse. These long-lasting alterations underlie the 
aggravating properties of several risk factors and the difficulty of 
remaining abstinent after detoxification.
	My research program investigates the neuronal basis of the 
long term and somehow permanent neuronal modifications 
induced by drugs of abuse. This particular research projects will 
determine the effects of Crystal Meth on synaptic transmission 
combining behavioural testing of methamphetamine self-
administration in rodents with patch-clamp recordings in brain 
slices. The long term objective is to help in developing therapies 
aimed at reversing these neuronal modifications and hope to 
permanently occlude susceptibility to develop addiction or to 
relapse albeit sincere efforts to refrain.",1 yr 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=170057&lang=en
170246,Characterization of the elaborate interplay between HIV-1 and dendritic cells,Tremblay  Michel J,"Tremblay, Michel J",Universit&eacute; Laval,Qu&eacute;bec,Canada,200809,784445.0,Operating Grant,Operating Grants,Biomedical,Infection and Immunity,Aids; Cellular Biology; Confocal; Dendritic Cells; Hiv-1; Molecular Biology,It is generally thought that dendritic cells are playing a pivotal role in HIV-1 transmission as they serve as the first potential targets for virus infection. The central objective of our work is to illuminate the intricate relationships between HIV-1 and dendritic cells. An improved understanding of the elaborate relationships between HIV-1 and dendritic cells is needed because it can result in the development of more appropriate and efficient preventive/therapeutic measures directed at a better control of HIV-1.,5 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=170246&lang=en
170247,Control of sensory neuron development,Chen  Hsiao-Huei,"Chen, Hsiao-Huei",Ottawa Hospital Research Institute,Ontario,Canada,200809,300000.0,CIHR New Investigator,Salary Programs,Biomedical,"Neurosciences, Mental Health and Addiction",Electrophysiology; Experimental Embryology; Immunohistochemistry; Molecular Biology; Neurogenesis; Transgenic Mice,"Sensory neurons are frequently lost in patients with cancer, diabetes or HIV infection. Optimally, cell based therapies to
selectively replace the missing sensory neurons will require knowledge of the molecular pathways controlling sensory
neuron development and function. This knowledge may also be useful to treat other sensory neuropathies affecting hearing
and vision. This proposal is directed at elucidating the signaling and transcription pathways that control development and
function of sensory neurons that detect muscle stretch in the ""knee-jerk"" reflex. We have discovered a protein that is
essential for these neurons to develop and survive. Using mouse models that lack this protein, we will dissect how this
protein works to control sensory neuron development.",5 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=170247&lang=en
170252,Delineating the role of epigenetic modification of histones in establishing tissue specific gene expression.,Dilworth  Jeffrey J,"Dilworth, Jeffrey J",Ottawa Hospital Research Institute,Ontario,Canada,200809,686661.0,Operating Grant,Operating Grants,Biomedical,"Human Development, Child and Youth Health",Chromatin; Development; Epigenetics; Gene Expression; Myogenesis; Stem Cells,"The different cell types within the human body all possess an identical DNA content. However, each cell-type has a specific subset of genes that it expresses which gives rise to its identity. Once a cell becomes committed to a cell lineage, a gene expression profile is established that is put into a memory that can then be passed on to daughter cells. This cellular memory is established through epigenetic modification of chromatin, and is mediated by the polycomb and trithorax groups of proteins. In this proposal, we plan to examine how specific cell types decide which genes are going to be marked by polycomb and trithorax group proteins. Using muscle cell development as a model system, we will examine the role of transcriptional regulators in targeting trithorax group proteins to muscle specific genes. Information gained through these studies will permit us to better understand how different cell types are established during development. This knowledge will allow us to take an informed approach to differentiating cells, and thus facilitate the development of efficient stem cell therapies.",5 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=170252&lang=en
170284,AHF-EM: Acute Heart Failure - Emergency Management,Ezekowitz  Justin A,"Ezekowitz, Justin A",University of Alberta,Alberta,Canada,200809,300000.0,CIHR New Investigator,Salary Programs,Health systems / services,Circulatory and Respiratory Health,Acute Heart Failure; Epidemiology; Pre-Hospital Care,"Heart failure is the inability of the heart to pump adequate blood and oxygen to supply the needs of the body.  Patients with heart failure have difficulty breathing, get tired easily and often have swollen legs and extra fluid in the lungs. In Canada, about 500,000 people have heart failure.  Heart failure is a condition that results in frequent visits to clinic, emergency room visits, hospital stays, and has a high risk of death.  Patients with heart failure have been well studied in the clinic, and when they are very sick (in hospital).  However, patients that are getting sicker and need urgent attention have not been studied. They are often said to have 'acute heart failure'.  This includes those needing an ambulance to take them to the emergency room.  This group of patients is very important as they need urgent diagnosis, treatment, and a decision if they need to stay at the hospital.  Currently, one third of patients with acute heart failure are sent straight home, and these patients are at high risk of needing urgent care again, and soon. This study will describe what happens to patients with heart failure during these first few hours of care, and in the next 3 months. By understanding how these patients are cared for, and how decisions are made, improvements to the system and potential treatments can be developed.",5 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=170284&lang=en
170291,Biomarkers of Disease Progression in Parkinsonism:  Magnetic Resonance Imaging and Spectroscopy,Martin  W.R. Wayne,"Martin, W.R. Wayne",University of Alberta,Alberta,Canada,200809,905080.0,Operating Grant,Operating Grants,Biomedical,"Neurosciences, Mental Health and Addiction",Gait Analysis; Magnetic Resonance Imaging; Magnetic Resonance Spectroscopy; Parkinson'S Disease; Surrogate Markers,"Parkinson's disease (PD) is a progressive neurological disorder that affects the means by which the brain controls movement.  Treatments that are currently available are reasonably effective at improving the symptoms in mildly to moderately affected individuals although some features associated with disease progression, such as impaired gait and balance, often do not respond well to medication.  Current treatments do not alter the progressive nature of the underlying disease process.  In order to evaluate the efficacy of new strategies to slow progression and to learn more about the gait changes associated with PD, we propose evaluating techniques that use magnetic resonance (MR) imaging and spectroscopy to measure the changes in the brain that occur in this disorder.  These studies will be performed in the Movement Disorders Clinic at the Glenrose Rehabilitation Hospital and at the Peter S. Allen MR Research Centre at the University of Alberta.  We will correlate the changes observed on magnetic resonance scans with the clinical changes in movement that we detect in the same patients, paying particular attention to changes in gait patterns.  We will also correlate these changes with those seen on positron emission tomography (PET) scans, to be done on many of the same patients at the University of British Columbia in Vancouver.  Our goal is to develop a new tool that can be used to evaluate disease progression in Parkinson's and to use this tool to assess the changes in the brain that occur in very early disease and in conjunction with worsening gait and movement problems.",5 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=170291&lang=en
170324,Access to and Quality of Cardiac Care for First Nations People,Hemmelgarn  Brenda R,"Hemmelgarn, Brenda R",University of Calgary,Alberta,Canada,200809,215875.0,Operating Grant,Operating Grants,Clinical,Indigenous Peoples' Health,Aboriginal People; Cardiovascular Disease; Health Services Research; Quality Of Care,"Cardiovascular disease (CVD) is becoming more common among the First Nations population in Canada, resulting in an increasing burden of illness and death. Hospital admission rates for CVD are stable or declining for the Caucasian population, while they are steadily increasing for the First Nations population.  In addition mortality secondary to CVD is also increasing in the First Nations population, with CVD the leading cause of death in this patient population.  Reasons for the increasing burden of CVD among the First Nations population are not entirely clear, although factors including access to specialized cardiac care and procedures, as well as quality of cardiac care, have been suggested as contributing.  No studies have been undertaken to determine if there are differences in access to and quality of cardiac care for First Nations compared to non-First Nations people.   This study will determine if differences in cardiac care exist for First Nations compared to non-First Nations people by exploring access to specialized cardiac care and invasive cardiac procedures.  It will also begin to address issues of quality of care by looking at differences in markers of quality care aimed at reducing the risk of vascular disease.",3 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=170324&lang=en
170339,Regulation of DNA replication,Brown  Grant W,"Brown, Grant W",University of Toronto,Ontario,Canada,200809,623515.0,Operating Grant,Operating Grants,Biomedical,Cancer Research,Cancer; Cell Cycle; Dna Replication; Genomic Instability; Yeast Molecular Biology,"Before a cell can grow and divide it must duplicate its DNA.  In this way, when a cell divides to form two daughter cells, each of the daughters will receive the full complement of genes required for its survival.  We are studying how cells determine when to duplicate their DNA, how they sense whether their DNA is fully duplicated, and how they prevent cell division until this duplication is complete.  These control pathways are critical for normal cell growth, and are frequently subverted in cancerous cells.  When these controls fail to function cells can grow and divide in inappropriate locations, and can ignore the signals that cause normal cells to cease dividing.  We hope that by understanding these pathways we can learn how they misfunction in cancerous cells.  Critical elements of these pathways represent targets for drugs to block inappropriate cell growth and markers for inappropriate growth, both of which might one day be used in treating cancers.",5 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=170339&lang=en
170340,Elucidation of novel mechanisms of glucagon action,Drucker  Daniel J,"Drucker, Daniel J",Lunenfeld-Tanenbaum Research Institute  (Toronto),Ontario,Canada,200809,737930.0,Operating Grant,Operating Grants,Biomedical,"Nutrition, Metabolism and Diabetes",Intestine; Pancreas; Peptide Hormones; Receptors,"Glucagon is a hormone secreted from the pancreas that together with insulin, controls levels of blood sugar through actions on the liver. Excess glucagon action in diabetic subjects underlies the inappropriate increase in blood glucose observed in diabetic subjects-hencing reducing glucagon action is a major goal for development of new agents to treat type 2 diabetes. The proposed studies analyze the consequences of attenuating glucagon action in mice with genetic disruption of the glucagon receptor. The Results of these studies are expected to extend our knowledge about how glucagon works, and to inform us about the likely safety and efficacy of new drugs used to block glucagon action for the treatment of diabetes.",5 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=170340&lang=en
170359,Investigation of Pulsed Radiation Effects on RF Coils for Integrated MRI-Linac Project,Rathee  Satyapal,"Rathee, Satyapal; Fallone, Biagio G",Alberta Health Services,Alberta,Canada,200809,263007.0,Operating Grant,Operating Grants,Biomedical,Cancer Research,Image Guided Radiation Therapy; Magnetic Resonance Imaiging; Monte Carlo Simulation; Mri-Linac; Radiation Effects On Rf Coils; Radiation Therapy,"Nearly half of the cancer patients will receive radiation therapy for their treatment. Image guided radiotherapy promises to precisely align the diseased volume with the radiation beams in real time, and it requires three dimensional imaging of the patient in treatment position regularly during the course of radiation therapy. The precise alignment of the patient with the radiation beams, in real time, will greatly eliminate the amount of healthy tissue which is unnecessarily irradiated in order to ensure accurate radiation dose delivery to the tumor that could move day to day due to patient setup and  during the treatment due to involuntary motion. The ideal imaging system would specifically depict the tumor in addition to the normal patient anatomy even during the activation of the treatment beam using no extra radiation dose to the patient. A magnetic resonance imaging system integrated with a radiation therapy treatment linac holds a great promise to satisfy all these requirements. At Cross Cancer Institute, we are developing an integrated magnetic resonance imaging linac system. In such a system, the radiofrequency coils that are used to form magnetic resonance image will be irradiated. The present proposal aims to investigate various effects of short, intense radiation pulses of linac on the operation of radiofrequency coils. In particular, we will investigate the transient signal generated in radiofrequency coils due to radiation as a function of instantaneous dose rate, coil configuration, type of holding material for the coil. We will also investigate the degradation in the coil performance related to magnetic resonacne imaging as a function of accumulated radiation dose. In addition, the effect of placing the coil around or on the patient's skin on the radiation dose received by patient's skin will be investigated. The successful completion of this project will allow us to optimize the coil design for MRI linac project.",3 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=170359&lang=en
170364,Understanding the role of the mitochondrial rhomboid protease in membrane dynamics,Mcquibban  George A,"Mcquibban, George A",University of Toronto,Ontario,Canada,200809,690225.0,Operating Grant,Operating Grants,Biomedical,Genetics,Dominant Optic Atrophy; Drosophila; Genetics; Membrane Dynamics; Mitochondria; Yeast,"Mitochondria are extremely dynamic organelles undergoing constant double membrane fusion and fission reactions.  The control and mechanisms involved to regulate this activity are currently of great interest in both the health and the death of the cell.  We have discovered the key action of the mitochondrial rhomboid protease in regulating membrane fusion.  Rhomboids are highly conserved intramembrane proteases that process initially membrane tethered substrates.  We have now identified three important substrates for the mitochondrial rhomboid: Mgm/OPA; a dynamin-related protein, Omi/HtrA2; a mitochondrial targeted protease, and Pink1; a mitochondrial targeted kinase.  The rhomboid-dependent processing of these three proteins is required for their biological activities.  Mutations in OPA cause the most prevalent early onset blindness mitochondrial disease called dominant optic atrophy; and both Pink1 and Omi have been linked to Parkinson's disease, underscoring the relevance of these discoveries.  By undertaking a series of in vitro structure/function analyses, combined with in vivo assays in both yeast and flies, we hope to uncover the significance of the rhomboid cleavage event, and understand its relevance to mitochondrial function in human disease.",5 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=170364&lang=en
170366,The Effect of Outdoor Air Pollution on the Development and Prognosis of the Inflammatory Bowel Diseases,Kaplan  Gilaad G,"Kaplan, Gilaad G",University of Calgary,Alberta,Canada,200809,300000.0,CIHR New Investigator,Salary Programs,Social / Cultural / Environmental / Population Health,Population and Public Health,Air Pollution; Environmental Risk Factor; Inflammatory Bowel Diseases,"Crohn's disease and ulcerative colitis are incurable diseases that affect a patient's gut. The causes of these diseases are not known. However, it most commonly occurs in industrial countries such as Canada that produce high levels of air pollution. Scientists have shown that air pollution can cause many problems such as worsening asthma, promoting heart attacks, and increasing the risk of cancer. Air pollution may cause sickness by promoting inflammation. The inflammation driven by air pollution is similar to the inflammation seen in patients who suffer from Crohn's disease and ulcerative colitis. Thus, it is possible that air pollution may cause inflammation that would result in Crohn's disease or ulcerative colitis. Because of this possibility we plan to study whether air pollution increases the risk of being diagnosed with Crohn's disease and/or ulcerative colitis.
We plan to look at many people living in Alberta and follow them for several years to see who develops Crohn's disease and ulcerative colitis. We will then look to see how much air pollution occurs near their homes. We will also study individuals who are not diagnosed with Crohn's disease or ulcerative and see how much air pollution occurs near where they reside. Our hypothesis is that individuals who live in areas of higher air pollution will be more likely to be diagnosed with Crohn's disease or ulcerative colitis than individuals who live in regions of lower air pollution. 
Linking air pollution to the development of Crohn's disease and ulcerative colitis is important. If air pollution increases the risk of developing Crohn's disease or ulcerative colitis, then lowering air pollution may prevent these diseases in some patients. Discovering such a relationship would potentially give us the tools to prevent these debilitating conditions - a far more effective strategy then treating an incurable disease once it has occurred.",5 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=170366&lang=en
170367,Arterial thermoplasty in coronary artery bypass surgery,Janssen  Luke J,"Janssen, Luke J",McMaster University,Ontario,Canada,200809,309483.0,Operating Grant,Operating Grants,Biomedical,Circulatory and Respiratory Health,Coronary Artery By-Pass Surgery; Human Radial Artery; Myocardial Infarction; Thermal Injury; Vasospasm,"A large percentage of Canadians suffer from coronary artery disease; coronary artery bypass graft (CABG) surgery is the treatment of choice for these people. Although the intent of performing CABG is to improve coronary bloodflow, a common complication is a sudden narrowing of the transplanted artery days/weeks after surgery (caused by contraction of a muscle around the artery). Current approaches aimed at preventing this problem -- ranging from drugs to physical interventions (e.g., stents; balloons; replacement) -- are too often inadequate and only used once the problem appears. A superior method for actual prevention of this post-surgical complication is desperately needed.

A novel technique which is gaining a great deal of attention in the airway/asthma field may fill this gap.  In asthma, a muscle which wraps around the airway contracts, making it hard to breath.  Thermoplasty involves the direct application of heat energy to that muscle, provoking little or no immediate response in the patient; however, 12 weeks later, the muscle is gone, although other important cell types are still present and look completely normal. Most importantly, the asthma has been permanently treated.

We intend to explore whether thermoplasty can be used to prevent the post-surgical constriction of the implanted arteries seen in CABG through the following three experiments:
Specific aim #1: examine the sensitivity of pig arteries to direct application of heat energy.
Specific aim #2: address the question of whether it is possible to adapt this approach to the treatment of the donor/graft arteries immediately before grafting into the recipient.
We have attached abundant preliminary data which, together with our track record, attest to our ability to complete this project.  This procedure is simple, cost-effective, easily adapted to the clinical setting, with the potential to greatly reduce or even eliminate the incidence and/or severity of post-operative complications.",3 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=170367&lang=en
170379,The Cedar Project: Exploring HIV and Hepatitis C Vulnerabilities among Young Aboriginal Drug Users in Three Canadian Cities,Spittal  Patricia M,"Spittal, Patricia M; Schechter, Martin T",University of British Columbia,British Columbia,Canada,200809,1911647.0,Operating Grant,Operating Grants,Social / Cultural / Environmental / Population Health,Infection and Immunity,Aboriginal Young People; Hepatitis C; Hiv; Multidisciplinary,"During the past decade the number of Aboriginal people diagnosed with HIV in Canada has grown more than any other ethnicity. Although Aboriginal people comprise only 4% of BC's population, they represent more than 13% of all positive tests. Whereas the majority of infections are related to injection drug use, factors that explain elevated risk and transmission of HIV among Aboriginal young people who use illicit drugs are not well understood. The Cedar Project is an observational study addressing HIV and HCV related vulnerabilities of Aboriginal young people living in Vancouver, Kamloops and Prince George, BC. We have recently identified concerning rates of both HCV and HIV infection, transition to injection and crystal methamphetamine use. Having an established cohort designed and implemented with Aboriginal partners and investigators now allows us the opportunity to expand our work to include identification of resiliency and protective factors from the perspectives of Aboriginal young people and focus in particular on a case management intervention aimed at increasing utilization of HIV care among HIV positive Cedar participants.",3 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=170379&lang=en
170384,Immune responses and regulation in hepatitis C virus infection: Implications for immunotherapy,Agrawal  Babita,"Agrawal, Babita",University of Alberta,Alberta,Canada,200809,602481.0,Operating Grant,Operating Grants,Biomedical,Infection and Immunity,Cellular Immunology; Experimental Medicine; Hepatitis C Virus; Immune Responses; Immunotherapy; Liver Disease,"Hepatitis C virus (HCV), leads to serious and permanent liver damage.  Late stage disease due to HCV is the leading cause of liver transplantation in North America.  The disease afflicts 175 million people worldwide, including 1-2 % of the North American population.  There is no vaccine or immunotherapy currently available for the treatment of HCV infection.  A combination of pegylated alpha-interferon and ribavirin is being used to treat HCV infected patients, but this treatment is not adequate, only works in a minority of patients, and has serious side effects associated with it.  Therefore, there is a tremendous need to develop new therapeutic approaches and vaccines against this devastating virus.  The focus of this project is to study immune responses against HCV and mechanisms how these immune responses are modified in HCV infection, so that novel immunotherapeutic and vaccine strategies can be designed and investigated.  In our studies we have recently established mouse models of HCV infection. In the proposed project we will investigate the components of successful immune responses capable of clearing HCV, and study how immune responses are modulated in HCV infection, using cell culture and mouse models.  This project will contribute significantly to the knowledge and understanding of immunity against chronic HCV infection and in the development of immunotherapy and vaccine candidates for the prevention and treatment of HCV infection worldwide.",5 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=170384&lang=en
170393,Novel tumour cell interactions in bone,Ghert  Michelle A,"Ghert, Michelle A",McMaster University,Ontario,Canada,200809,315643.0,Operating Grant,Operating Grants,Biomedical,Musculoskeletal Health and Arthritis,Ap-1; Bone; Cytokine; Giant Cell Tumour; Mmp-13; Runx2,"The skeleton is very important for daily activities such as walking and posture. It is hence important for quality of life for an
individual. Cancers that primarily arise within the bone or that have spread to the bone can disrupt the architecture of the
bone by altering the balance of bone formation and remodeling leading to overall bone destruction, pain and fracture. Giant
Cell Tumour of bone is an aggressive bone tumour that typically affects young adults and requires extensive surgery for
cure. Dr. Ghert's lab has done extensive research exploring the mechanisms involved in the destruction of bone by these
tumours. The overall goal of Dr. Ghert's research is to develop effective targeted molecular treatment for cancers that affect
bone in which bone formation and destruction are imbalanced.",3 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=170393&lang=en
170396,The Role of the Inflammasome in Renal Injury,Muruve  Daniel A,"Muruve, Daniel A",University of Calgary,Alberta,Canada,200809,512080.0,Operating Grant,Operating Grants,Biomedical,Infection and Immunity,Cytokines; Inflammation; Innate Immune System; Kidney Disease; Kidney Failure; Renal Tubular Epithelium,"Kidney diseases are common in the general population. Many types of kidney disease are caused by toxins, poor circulation,
diabetes and other insults. Invariably, these types of kidney injury result in either acute or chronic kidney failure which has a
significant impact on patient health. When kidneys become injured, a significant component of inflammation is involved. It is
known that inflammation that occurs during injury contributes to kidney failure resulting in a worse outcome. We have recently identified a new pathway of inflammation in the cell. We believe that this inflammatory pathway (called the inflammasome)is activated by the types of injury stated above such as poor circulation or toxins. The activation of the inflammasome contributes to the severity of the kidney injury and the ultimate outcome that is kidney failure. Research in this area may identify new pathways or understanding of kidney failure that can be targeted with drugs, that ultimately will help patients with kidney failure.",4 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=170396&lang=en
170397,Assembly and export of bacterial capsular polysaccharides,Whitfield  Christopher,"Whitfield, Christopher",University of Guelph,Ontario,Canada,200809,748270.0,Operating Grant,Operating Grants,Biomedical,Infection and Immunity,Capsular Polysaccharides; Cell Surfaces; Microbial Pathogens; Outer Membranes; Transport; Virulence Factors,"The surfaces of bacteria are typically composed of a complex and dynamic array of carbohydrate-containing macromolecules. An extensive layer of polysaccharide known as the capsule covers the surfaces of many bacterial pathogens. Capsules have crucial roles in many interactions between bacteria and their environments, including interplay between invading bacteria and host cell defenses. Capsules are generally protective structures and treatments that eliminate capsules (or dramatically reduce their size) can render a bacterial pathogen susceptible to normal host defenses. Consequently, reactions involved in capsule synthesis represent potential targets for therapeutic intervention. Any attempts to develop capsule assembly as a therapeutic target requires a detailed understanding of the underlying processes and this is the goal of our work. We intend to characterize in detail the structure and function of two protein families involved in novel aspects of capsule assembly. The precise mechanisms of action of these proteins are unknown. However, representatives are widely distributed in bacteria, indicating that the results obtained will have broad impact. In addition, the complex processes underlying capsule assembly are of fundamental importance and our studies are expected to provide insight into other important cellular events in pathogenic bacteria.",5 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=170397&lang=en
170399,Application of User-Centered Participatory Design Research in the Development of an Online Intervention to Provide Social Support to Parents of Adolescents with Diabetes,Paterson  Barbara L,"Paterson, Barbara L",University of New Brunswick (Fredericton),New Brunswick,Canada,200809,148635.0,Operating Grant,Operating Grants,Social / Cultural / Environmental / Population Health,"Human Development, Child and Youth Health",Adolescence; Diabetes; Intervention; Parenting; Participatory Action Research; Social Support,"Adolescence is a time when children with type 1 diabetes may resist parental involvement in their diabetes management but at the same time, they may neglect aspects of their self-management. Parents of adolescents with type 1 diabetes typically experience a number of stressors during this period, particularly in relation to making the transition between the main decision maker to assuming a minor role in regard to the child's diabetes management.The research is intended to design and develop an online social support intervention to assist parents in such a transition. It will draw on research approaches that entail working with parents of children with diabetes, service providers and web designers to develop a web-based intervention that meets the needs for social support of parents of adolescents with diabetes.",2 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=170399&lang=en
170400,Effects of prenatal ethanol exposure on hormonal regulation of hippocampal function.,Christie  Brian R,"Christie, Brian R",University of Victoria (British Columbia),British Columbia,Canada,200809,702545.0,Operating Grant,Operating Grants,Biomedical,Gender and Health,Electrophysiology; Hippocampus; Hormones; Nmda Receptors; Sex; Synaptic Plasticity,"Fetal alcohol spectrum disorders (FASD) result from the consumption of alcohol during pregnancy. This is the leading cause of preventable mental retardation in humans, but for a variety of reasons is not well understood. We do know that prenatal ethanol exposure (PNEE) kills some cells in the brain, and that this seems to lead to learning problems. Very little is known about how males and females are differentially affected by PNEE, though we do know that estrogen and testosterone differentially affect learning and memory processes. We will use the hippocampus, a part of the brain involved in learning and memory, as the main structure to study in this research. Using an animal model, we will determine how prenatal ethanol exposure alters hormonal control of the way neurons communicate in this structure. Our intent is to get to a stage where we can determine if hormone replacement therapy might be a suitable method for helping to ameliorate some of the cognitive deficits experienced by at least some of the individuals afflicted with FASD.",5 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=170400&lang=en
170401,The Multiple Cellular Functions of the Hsp90 Molecular Chaperone: The Role of Hsp90 and the Conserved R2TP Complex in Ribosomal RNA Processing,Houry  Walid A,"Houry, Walid A",University of Toronto,Ontario,Canada,200809,677895.0,Operating Grant,Operating Grants,Biomedical,Cancer Research,Cancer; Cochaperones; Helicases; Hsp90 Molecular Chaperone; Ribosomal Rna Processing; Snorna,"Hsp90 is a ubiquitous molecular chaperone that is found in eubacteria and all branches of eukarya. It plays a central role in cellular signaling since it is essential for maintaining the activity of several signaling proteins including steroid hormone receptors and protein kinases. Hsp90 is typically overexpressed in cancer cells and is now the target of novel anti-cancer drugs, some of which are in clinical trials. Our research is currently concentrated on better understanding the functions of Hsp90 in the cell. We had previously identified a novel protein complex that interacts with Hsp90. Recently, we were able to show that the complex allows Hsp90 to modulate ribosome biogenesis. This is a very novel finding that has not been previously described and might have important clinical implications when using drugs to target Hsp90. The proposed project will further explore this novel activity of this essential chaperone.",5 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=170401&lang=en
170402,Exposure to environmental chemicals and psychomotor development: prospective birth study of neurotoxic effects using peripheral biomarkers (GESTE study),Takser  Larissa,"Takser, Larissa",Universit&eacute; de Sherbrooke,Qu&eacute;bec,Canada,200809,300000.0,CIHR New Investigator,Salary Programs,Social / Cultural / Environmental / Population Health,"Human Development, Child and Youth Health",Biomarkers; Child Development; Environmental Exposures; Epidemiology; Reproduction; Toxicology,"Neurodevelopmental disabilities affect 3-8% of babies born each year in North America, with known etiology for less than 25% of those disabilities. The potential for environmental contaminants to produce neurological, cognitive, or other behaviour deficits as a result of developmental exposure has received increasing attention. Most environmental chemicals exert their toxic effects in the foetus via circulating blood through the placenta. The foetus is more susceptible to toxic exposure than the adult due to its fragile and rapid developmental state and lack of adequate defence mechanisms. Based on existing knowledge of the toxicity of persistent environmental pollutants from experimental research, we hypothesize that environmental exposure to Mn, Cd, Pb, PCB, PBDE and Hg simultaneously during prenatal life associates with increased risk of poorer psychomotor performances in children from the general population. In order to ensure the safety of current levels of environmental exposures during prenatal life in pregnant women from the general population, we propose to conduct a birth prospective cohort using biomarkers of effect for a mixture of known persistent substances.",5 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=170402&lang=en
170403,Regulation of the gene transfer agent (GTA) of Rhodobacter  capsulatus,Beatty  John Thomas,"Beatty, John Thomas",University of British Columbia,British Columbia,Canada,200809,512507.0,Operating Grant,Operating Grants,Biomedical,Genetics,Bacteria; Dna Virus; Gene Transfer Agent; Genetic Exchange; Molecular Biology,"This work is to study how a bacterial cell controls the production of a virus-like particle (the gene transfer agent, or GTA) that has the sole function of transfering genes from a donor to a recipient cell.  Our preliminary work indicates aspects of several changes in environmental conditions, such as the presence or absence of specific chemicals, that affect gene transfer.  We wish to determine exactly how such chemicals, or 'signals', are sensed by cells and the biochemical pathways leading from signal sensation to the turn on/off of GTA genes.",5 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=170403&lang=en
170406,Intestinal Microbiota and the Gut-Brain Axis.,Collins  Stephen M,"Collins, Stephen M; Bercik, Premysl",McMaster University,Ontario,Canada,200809,855635.0,Operating Grant,Operating Grants,Biomedical,Infection and Immunity,Functional Gi Disorders; Gut Brain Axis; Microbiota,"The gastrointestinal (GI) tract and the brain are intimately connected and behavioral factors are important in the expression of common GI diseases such as Irritable Bowel Syndrome (IBS). IBS is the most common GI disorder in our society but its cause is poorly understood and treatment is largely symptom-based; it does not cure. This condition is frequently accompanied by depression or anxiety and is considered by some to psychosomatic. Recent observations show that acute gastroenteritis can trigger IBS and that this may result in changes in the bacterial population that resides in the gut - known as flora. In this proposal, we will investigate whether changes in gut flora contribute to the expression of IBS using a mouse model. We have already shown that perturbing gut flora produces changes bowel function. As psychiatric conditions often accompany IBS, we will investigate whether the gut flora influence the brain and change behavior. The proposal uses molecular tools to identify gut bacteria and experiments are undertaken in a unique germ free laboratory to minimize contamination. If we succeed in showing that gut flora influence both gut function and behavior, then it will be possible to develop a single treatment strategy to treat all aspects of this condition.",5 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=170406&lang=en
170407,Abnormal Brain Development in Newborns with Congenital Heart Disease,Miller  Steven P,"Miller, Steven P",University of British Columbia,British Columbia,Canada,200809,798370.0,Operating Grant,Operating Grants,Clinical,"Human Development, Child and Youth Health",Brain Development; Congenital Heart Disease; Developmental Outcome; Magnetic Resonance Imaging; Stroke; White Matter Injury,"Heart birth defects are of the most common birth defects diagnosed in Canada, affecting 1 in 100 newborns each year. Impairments in motor and cognitive development are common in children born with heart birth defects and pose significant burdens on the child, family and society. These impairments are frequently attributed to brain injury secondary to the heart birth defect and may be acquired either before birth or in the weeks after birth. As yet, however, the reasons for brain injury in this population of newborns are poorly understood, limiting the development of effective therapies to prevent brain injury and to counsel parents regarding long term prognosis. Consequently, it is a high priority to improve our understanding of brain injury in newborns with heart birth defects. Our preliminary data suggest that brain development is impaired in newborns with heart birth defects. The overall hypothesis of this study is that delayed brain development results in abnormal motor and cognitive outcomes. We will quantify brain development and brain injury in term newborns with heart birth defects using advanced magnetic resonance (MR) techniques before birth (in utero), shortly after birth before heart surgery and again after heart surgery: MR imaging for brain injury, diffusion tensor imaging for brain connectivity and MR spectroscopic imaging for brain metabolism. We will then follow this group of newborns with heart birth defects through childhood to observe their motor and cognitive outcomes. A better understanding of brain injury that occurs in newborns with heart disease, and the ability to identify and quantify brain injury at a time when intervention is possible, is sorely needed to design and test new strategies for preventing or treating brain injury. The development of accurate measures of brain injury in newborns will also help parents and physicians better care for newborns with heart disease by providing important prognostic information.",5 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=170407&lang=en
170414,Genetic integrity of the haploid male germ cells,Boissonneault  Guylain,"Boissonneault, Guylain",Universit&eacute; de Sherbrooke,Qu&eacute;bec,Canada,200809,492712.0,Operating Grant,Operating Grants,Biomedical,Genetics,Chromatin Remodeling; Dna Repair; Dna Strand Breaks; Genetic Integrity; Mutation; Spermatids,"The nuclear structure of male germ cells changes drastically just before they become mature spermatozoa. This transition provides a much greater stability to the nucleus once completed. We have shown that this change in structure is associated with the formation of DNA breakage at both strands (double-stranded breaks) in every cell and that it occurs naturally. Because these precursor cells possess half the chromosome set of a normal (somatic) cells, any damage to DNA cannot rely on an intact copy for template repair making this transition a very sensitive one. Our objectives are to determine the distribution of DNA strand breaks within the genome, the repair mechanism involved, the genetic consequences of this transition as well as its sensitivity to drugs such as those used in chemotherapy. We may therefore unravel an as yet unsuspected but important source of genetic instability transmitted to the embryos with an evolutionary impact.",4 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=170414&lang=en
170428,Vitrification and transplantation of articular cartilage,Jomha  Nadr M,"Jomha, Nadr M",University of Alberta,Alberta,Canada,200809,254422.0,Operating Grant,Operating Grants,Biomedical,Musculoskeletal Health and Arthritis,Articular Cartilage; Mathematical Modeling; Metabolic Evaluation; Statistical Methodology; Transplantation; Vitrification,"Injuries to and diseases of joint cartilage can lead to osteoarthritis (0A) affecting 4 million Canadians with 60% younger than 65 years of age. OA is the second leading cause of work disability in North America. This research seeks a treatment option (joint transplantation) for damaged joint cartilage thereby limiting development of OA. The best treatment option would be to transplant normal joint cartilage but timing required for tissue donation requires a preservation technique. Current preservation techniques for joint transplants rely on controlled ice formation but this kills the cells that maintain the joint cartilage matrix and physically damages the intricate structure of the cartilage matrix. We propose a method of preseving the integrity of joint cartilage by avoiding ice crystal formation (vitrification). Vitrification maintains cell viability and matrix structure allowing cartilage storage for later use in transplantation procedures for damaged joints, improving long-term
clinical outcomes of currently performed Orthopaedic surgical techniques, and decreasing the risk of infectious disease
transmission. The research proposed here will use a statistical approach to generate experimental data and compare this with mathematical modeling - a unique approach applied to preservation of joint cartilage. We will develop new vitrification solutions, learn about toxicity of various solutions and determine the ability of these agents to enter the matrix. The successful vitrification protocol will then be performed on a transplantation model in preparation for use in a joint transplantation program. This research can help prevent osteoarthritis from developing after joint injury, with the high
likelihood of improving the quality of life locally and internationally.",3 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=170428&lang=en
170430,L'abolition du paiement des services de santé en Afrique de l'Ouest,Ridde  Val&eacute;ry,"Ridde, Valéry",Centre hospitalier de l'Universit&eacute; de Montr&eacute;al (CHUM),Qu&eacute;bec,Canada,200809,300000.0,CIHR New Investigator,Salary Programs,Health systems / services,Population and Public Health,Afrique; Financement; Politiques Publiques; Système De Santé; Équité,L'objet de notre programme de recherche réalisé en Afrique de l'Ouest vise comprendre si l'abolition du paiement direct des soins de santé est une stratégie efficace pour améliorer l'équité d'accès au système de santé.,5 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=170430&lang=en
170461,"Improving Medication Use, Health Care and Quality of Life Through Innovative Health Outcomes Research",Cadarette  Suzanne M,"Cadarette, Suzanne M",University of Toronto,Ontario,Canada,200809,300000.0,CIHR New Investigator,Salary Programs,Health systems / services,Aging,Aging; Disease Prevention; Health Services Research; Osteoporosis; Pharmacoepidemiology,"Administrative claims data are rich and provide information to study how drugs are used in the real-world, and thus also provide real-world drug safety and effectiveness data. We outline two pilot projects that will capitalize on administrative claims data from Ontario.

First, valid estimates of the safety and effectiveness of therapeutics are required to help inform drug policy decision making. Unfortunately, results from claims-based observational studies are error-prone due to incomplete information. We will use innovative methods that supplement claims-based data with other data sources to examine the potential benefits of these analytic strategies in improving estimates of the safety and effectiveness of drugs. We will start by examining fracture outcomes among seniors.

Second, we know that adherence to therapy for osteoporosis, hypertension and hypercholesterolemia is suboptimal. However, little information is available regarding the patterns of drug use or the implications of gaps in adherence to therapy for these conditions. We will study patterns of pharmacotherapy, predictors of large gaps in treatment and implications of gaps in adherence to therapy for these conditions, starting with osteoporosis. Results will help identify the burden of illness in the population related to suboptimal adherence, and may be used to help develop quality improvement interventions. 

Results from these pilot projects will help inform future innovative projects that will aim to reduce the burden of illness in the population due to adverse drug effects and failure to adhere to preventive pharmacotherapy. Results will be important to guide health policy, develop quality improvement interventions, reduce health care costs and ultimately reduce the burden of illness in the population due to adverse drug effects and suboptimal adherence to chronic pharmacotherapy.",5 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=170461&lang=en
170462,Molecular basis for Central Core Disease and RyR1-related myopathies,Maclennan  David H,"Maclennan, David H",University of Toronto,Ontario,Canada,200809,925458.0,Operating Grant,Operating Grants,Biomedical,Genetics,Animal Models; Biochemistry; Central Core Disease; Genetic Disease; Ryanodine Receptor; Skeletal Muscle,"Muscle contraction is triggered by the release of calcium into muscle cells from a storage compartment inside the cells, referred to as the sarcoplasmic reticulum; relaxation is initiated by return of calcium to the storage compartment. Thus every bodily movement and every heartbeat is dependent on calcium fluxes. Calcium release channels are responsible for releasing calcium from the storage compartment to bring about muscle contraction. Two human diseases, malignant hyperthermia, a toxic response to anesthetics, and central core disease, causing muscle weakness, are caused by mutations in the skeletal muscle form of the calcium release channel. In recent work, Dr. MacLennan and his group have developed a mouse line in which the calcium release channel is mutated to an inactive form. When both copies of the mutant gene are present, the embryonic mouse displays a block in development; when only one copy is present, the mouse lives, but displays symptoms of muscle disease that are consistent with central core disease. Both of these mouse models of disease are interesting. The block in development is caused by the lack of calcium signals that direct proper development in mice, but these signals are not defined. Dr. Maclennan's group propose to identify these signals. The mouse with central core disease offers the opportunity for understanding how this and other muscle diseases develop and how intervention might ameliorate the effects of muscle diseases.",5 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=170462&lang=en
170470,Neural and Biomechanical Control of Turning in People with Stroke,Lam  Tania,"Lam, Tania",University of British Columbia,British Columbia,Canada,200809,300000.0,CIHR New Investigator,Salary Programs,Biomedical,"Neurosciences, Mental Health and Addiction",Centre Of Pressure; Electromyography; Functional Mobility; Stroke; Treadmill Training; Turning,"Although many people who had a stroke can get better and walk again, there are still problems with walking that limit their ability to fully take part in many daily activities. Up to now, stroke researchers have usually tested walking by asking people to walk forwards in a straight line. However, in everyday life people must constantly change their direction or turn while walking. The ability to turn is important to make sure that people are able to walk around safely and easily in their homes as well as outside in their communities. In addition, turning also poses a greater risk of falling compared with walking straight ahead. Despite these facts, there is very little research about turning and walking in people with stroke. Thus the overall objectives of this research are to understand how difficulties in walking affect turning in people with stroke. We will use recordings of muscle activity and leg movements during walking to analyze the differences in turning strategies in people with stroke compared with people who have not had a stroke. We will also study the extent to which different rehabilitation therapies for improving walking also help to improve turning ability in people who have had a stroke. The results from this research will help us develop better testing tools and training strategies for therapists to use as they work to help people who have had a stroke walk as well as possible. Ultimately, better walking ability will help promote healthier and more active lifestyles for people who have had a stroke.",5 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=170470&lang=en
170474,Combination pharmacotherapy for the management of pain (2008),Gilron  Ian,"Gilron, Ian","Queen's University (Kingston, Ontario)",Ontario,Canada,200809,416885.0,Randomized Controlled Trials,Randomized Controlled Trials,Clinical,"Neurosciences, Mental Health and Addiction",Analgesic Pharmacology; Anticonvulsants; Antidepressants; Chronic Pain; Clinical Pharmacology; Controlled Trials; Diabetic Neuropathy; Drug Combinations; Neuropathic Pain; Opioids; Pain; Pain Measurement; Randomized,"Pain is a major public health problem affecting one-third of the population and costing $165 billion/year in North America alone. Individual pain-relievers provide incomplete relief and can often produce troubling side effects. It has been suggested that combining different kinds of pain-relievers may improve effectiveness and reduce side effects. Some drug combinations have been proven better than each of their components alone. However, this theory has been tested for very few specific drug combinations. Studies show that, on their own, the antidepressant drug, nortriptyline, and the opioid drug, morphine, partially relieve pain due to nerve disease. The main objective of this grant proposal is to determine whether using a combination of these two drugs relieves pain more effectively and/or causes less side effects than when using either drug alone. This objective will be met by conducting a clinical trial in diabetic patients with pain due to nerve disease. The research plan involves a double-blind, randomized crossover trial which compares chronic oral administration of a nortriptyline/morphine combination to single-agent nortriptyline or morphine in patients with painful diabetic neuropathy. During each of these treatment periods, drug dosage will be gradually increased to the highest possible dose, yet a dose which produces only minimal side effects. We expect to determine whether this combination is more beneficial than either drug alone. Future research using these methods will allow for the testing of other analgesic combinations for pain management.",3 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=170474&lang=en
170476,Peptide and Protein Structure in Membranes,Deber  Charles M,"Deber, Charles M",Hospital for Sick Children (Toronto),Ontario,Canada,200809,673230.0,Operating Grant,Operating Grants,Biomedical,Genetics,Helix-Helix Interactions; Membrane Proteins; Protein Folding In Membranes; Protein Structure; Protein-Lipid Interactions; Transmembrane Helices,"Embedded in the membranes of all living cells, membrane proteins are the molecular links between the inside and outside world.  These proteins help preserve the biological structure of the cells; they act as receptors by participating in signaling (such as telling the cell when to 'grow'); and they act as transporters to regulate the flow of molecules into and out of the cell, including calcium or sodium ions, nutrients such as amino acids and sugars, as well as drugs and more complex molecules.  Membrane proteins consist of long chains of amino acids; critical mutations even at a single point in the chain underlie the causes of many human diseases.  These include several forms of cancer, diabetes, and cystic fibrosis.  But it is very difficult to deduce the molecular mechanisms of a disease, and move toward drug design/therapy, without fundamental structural information about the overall protein.  Our research involves studies of proteins and peptides, focusing on the protein segments that are physically integrated into the cell membranes.  By using a variety of modern laboratory methods and instruments that can be applied to the determination of protein structure, we hope to discover how small variations in the amino acid sequence impact on the ability of the protein to function normally.  This research should yield fundamental information as to how specific amino acids within membranes give rise to the correct protein function, and in the longer range will provide the rationale for ascribing a structural basis to the aberrant effects of disease-related mutations in membrane proteins.  As we increase our understanding of these important molecules, we will be better positioned to develop therapies against diseases of these proteins.",5 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=170476&lang=en
170477,Facilitating physical activity behavior and health outcomes in breast cancer survivors receiving chemotherapy: A practical behavioral trial,Vallance  Jeffrey K,"Vallance, Jeffrey K",Athabasca University (Alberta),Alberta,Canada,200809,300000.0,CIHR New Investigator,Salary Programs,Social / Cultural / Environmental / Population Health,Population and Public Health,Breast Cancer; Chemotherapy; Physical Activity; Practical Behavioral Trial; Quality Of Life; Step Pedometers,"Few interventions can help breast cancer patients improve their physical strength, stamina, and overall well-being during chemotherapy. Literature is now suggesting that physical activity (PA) is a safe, feasible, and effective intervention for breast cancer patients receiving chemotherapy. Given the low PA rates among those receiving chemotherapy for breast cancer, developing practical ways to facilitate PA behavior during chemotherapy for breast cancer are necessary.
Recently we evaluated and published an intervention to increase PA in breast cancer survivors (Activity Promotion Trial). Trial results indicated that a breast cancer PA guidebook and a step pedometer were effective strategies for increasing PA, and improving health-related quality of life and fatigue. The primary aim of this study is to determine if a PA guidebook for breast cancer survivors, a step pedometer, and supplementary step/pedometer resource are effective tools to help breast cancer patients receiving chemotherapy initiate and stay active during their treatments. This study will be a practical behavioral trial (PBT). Breast cancer patients receiving the intervention will be compared to a group receiving only a generic 2- page PA leaflet. Our primary interest is in average physical activity minutes per week, which we will measure before their first and after their last chemotherapy treatment. On various rating scales, patients will also be asked about their current PA, perceived quality of life, fatigue, depression, anxiety, and self-esteem.
This trial explores practical and evidence-based strategies in which breast cancer patients receiving chemotherapy can learn about and engage in PA during chemotherapy. This trial will also give Southern Alberta breast cancer patients an opportunity to participate in evidence-based programs designed to facilitate their health, breast cancer recovery, and disease-free survival.",5 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=170477&lang=en
170478,Facilitating physical activity behavior and health outcomes in breast cancer survivors receiving chemotherapy: A practical behavioral trial,Vallance  Jeffrey K,"Vallance, Jeffrey K",Athabasca University (Alberta),Alberta,Canada,200809,187963.0,Operating Grant,Operating Grants,Social / Cultural / Environmental / Population Health,Population and Public Health,Breast Cancer; Chemotherapy; Physical Activity; Practical Behavioral Trial; Quality Of Life; Step Pedometers,"Few interventions can help breast cancer patients improve their physical strength, stamina, and overall well-being during chemotherapy. Literature is now suggesting that physical activity (PA) is a safe, feasible, and effective intervention for breast cancer patients receiving chemotherapy. Given the low PA rates among those receiving chemotherapy for breast cancer, developing practical ways to facilitate PA behavior during chemotherapy for breast cancer are necessary.
Recently we evaluated and published an intervention to increase PA in breast cancer survivors (Activity Promotion Trial). Trial results indicated that a breast cancer PA guidebook and a step pedometer were effective strategies for increasing PA, and improving health-related quality of life and fatigue. The primary aim of this study is to determine if a PA guidebook for breast cancer survivors, a step pedometer, and supplementary step/pedometer resource are effective tools to help breast cancer patients receiving chemotherapy initiate and stay active during and after their treatments. This study will be a practical behavioral trial (PBT). 
Breast cancer survivors receiving the intervention will be compared to a group receiving only a generic 2- page PA leaflet. Our primary interest is in average physical activity minutes per week, which we will measure before their first and after their last chemotherapy treatment. On various rating scales, survivors will also be asked about their current PA, perceived quality of life, fatigue, depression, anxiety, and self-esteem.
This trial explores practical and evidence-based strategies in which breast cancer patients receiving chemotherapy can learn about and engage in PA during chemotherapy. This trial will also give Southern Alberta breast cancer patients an opportunity to participate in evidence-based programs designed to facilitate their health, breast",3 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=170478&lang=en
170480,Cytokines and stressors influence depression: sensitization and cross sensitization,Anisman  Hymie,"Anisman, Hymie",Carleton University (Ottawa),Ontario,Canada,200809,823380.0,Operating Grant,Operating Grants,Biomedical,"Neurosciences, Mental Health and Addiction",Crh; Cytokine; Depression; Gaba; Serotonin,"Stressful events are known to promote major depressive disorder, and the occurrence of such an outcome is more pronounced among individuals that had previously experienced major life stressors. Indeed, it seems that with each stressor experience, and with each episode of depression, the interval between depressive episodes becomes shorter, the depression more severe and long lasting, and the stressor severity necessary to promote the episode is less intense. Activation of the inflammatory immune system, and particularly activation of immune signaling molecules (termed cytokines), engenders neuroendocrine and brain chemical changes like those elicited by stressors, and might thus come to elicit depression. The intent of the proposed experiments is to determine the contribution two particular cytokines, namely interleukin-1 and interleukin-6, in promoting brain chemical changes thought to underlie depression. Of particular interest is to establish whether initial immune activation exacerbates neurochemical and behavioral responses ordinarily elicited by later immune and stress challenges. Moreover, we will establish whether and how stressful events influence the response to later immune challenges and determine the processes by which sensitization and cross sensitization effects occur. The recurrence of depression is a major obstacle in the treatment of this disorder, and the proposed studies may help to identify factors that contribute to illness recurrence.",5 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=170480&lang=en
170482,Characterization of B cell tolerance and functional abnormalities in human lupus,Wither  Joan E,"Wither, Joan E",University Health Network (Toronto),Ontario,Canada,200809,363714.0,Operating Grant,Operating Grants,Biomedical,Infection and Immunity,Autoimmunity; B Cells; Lupus; Tolerance,"The immune system plays an important role in discriminating between proteins that are foreign to the body, such as those in the bacteria and viruses that cause infections, and proteins that are normal parts of the body, such as those found in organs like the kidney and the brain.  Foreign proteins are attacked preventing overwhelming infection while self-proteins are normally left unharmed.  We believe that Systemic Lupus Erythematosus (SLE) results from defects in the immune system that lead to abnormal activation of cells that react to self-proteins.  In the immune system two classes of cells, T and B cells, act in concert to mount an immune response.  In many strains of mice that develop a lupus-like illness, B cell functional abnormalities play a central role in the pathogenesis of disease, yet the function of B cells in human lupus has not been well explored.  Nevertheless, we, and others have shown that the B cells of humans with lupus are abnormally activated suggesting that they too have altered function.  Here we seek to identify the functional abnormalities in the B cells of lupus patients and to determine whether they lead to altered responses to self-proteins.  Identification of such abnormalities could ultimately lead to characterization of the underlying biochemical and genetic defects that produce SLE and more effective therapies for this condition.",3 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=170482&lang=en
170495,The Role of Endocytic Proteins at Bacteria-Induced Pedestals,Guttman  Julian A,"Guttman, Julian A","Simon Fraser University (Burnaby, B.C.)",British Columbia,Canada,200809,300000.0,CIHR New Investigator,Salary Programs,Biomedical,Infection and Immunity,Animal Models; Attaching And Effacing Pathogens; Clathrin-Based Endocytosis; Host-Pathogen Interactions; Protein Localization; Rna Interference,"Pathogenic E.coli infections are a serious global health concern.  During their disease processes, these organisms remain outside of host cells and inject a multitude of pathogenic proteins to commandeer normal cellular functions.  A characteristic feature of these diseases involves the generation of host cell protrusions beneath the attached bacteria that results in these microbes rising off the natural surface of the cell onto E.coli generated structures called, pedestals.  Surprisingly, I recently found that clathrin, a protein known to internalize particles and other bacteria into cells, is an essential component of pedestals and is required for their generation, thus providing a previously unknown function of this protein.  In order to understand the mechanisms involved in the non-internalization functions of clathrin, I will examine the subversion strategies that pathogenic E.coli use to avoid clathrin-based internalization in order to remain extracellular.  In addition to understanding the methods used by these bacteria to generate disease, this work will also provide insight into the general mechanisms of controlling particle internalization thus allowing for the design of therapeutics.",5 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=170495&lang=en
170502,Night waking reduction in Canadian infants: A randomized clinical trial of a parent-based cognitive and behavioural intervention in community health units,Hall  Wendy A,"Hall, Wendy A",University of British Columbia,British Columbia,Canada,200809,301060.0,Randomized Controlled Trials,Randomized Controlled Trials,Social / Cultural / Environmental / Population Health,Population and Public Health,Behavioural Sleep Problems; Cognitive And Behavioural Intervention; Community Health Nurses; Group Intervention; Infants; Parents; Randomized Controlled Trial,"Infant behavioural sleep problems affect up to 50% of infants and contribute to adverse effects for infant development and parents' health.  A significant proportion of infants do not grow out of sleep problems. Health care professionals often fail to recognize and treat infant behavioural sleep problems. Parents are exposed to conflicting advice which is frustrating and can undermine their parenting confidence. Extensive research has linked parents' cognitions and behaviours to the development and perpetuation of infant sleep problems. One-on-one approaches to treating behavioural sleep problems have empirical support; however, they often last for several weeks, are costly, and are not widely available to parents. A simple, inexpensive cognitive-behavioural intervention for groups of parents is available to be offered by public health nurses to improve infant sleep problems. Such interventions have not been offered in Canada. An effective, widely available sleep intervention can improve infants' and parents' well being.",2 yrs 6 mths,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=170502&lang=en
170503,Adaptive servo ventilation for therapy of sleep apnea in heart failure,Bradley  Douglas T,"Bradley, Douglas T",Toronto Rehabilitation Institute-UHN,Ontario,Canada,200809,1583255.0,CIHR/SME Collaborative Research Program - Randomized Controlled Trials,Randomized Controlled Trials,Clinical,Circulatory and Respiratory Health,Adaptive Servo Ventilation; Central Sleep Apnea; Heart Failure; Obstructive Sleep Apnea; Randomized Trial,"Heart failure (HF) affects 2% Canadians and is now the second leading cause of death. It is therefore important to identify potentially treatable factors that could improve the outcome of this disease. Obstructive and central sleep apnea (OSA and CSA, respectively) may be 2 such factors. They occur in approximately 50% of patients with heart failure (HF), where they increase the risk of premature death. Previous studies have shown that treating these 2 breathing disorders with continuous positive airway pressure (CPAP) improves heart function. However, owing to the small number of patients studied, and that CPAP is ineffective in alleviating CSA in many patients, these studies did not demonstrate that treating OSA or CSA reduces morbidity and mortality. Nevertheless, among HF patients with CSA, when CPAP did eliminate CSA, survival improved. Thus, there seems to be potential for treating OSA and CSA to improve survival in HF patients. Adaptive servo ventilation (ASV) is a new device that is equally effective in alleviating OSA, but more effective in alleviating CSA than CPAP. We therefore believe that this device has a greater chance to improve survival than CPAP. Accordingly, we will test the effects of ASV on death and hospitalization rates in 860 HF patients with OSA or CSA in 25 centres in Canada and 6 other countries. Positive results would fundamentally alter the way HF is investigated and treated.",5 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=170503&lang=en
170510,Dose-response effects of exercise on abdominal obesity and risk factors for cardiovascular disease in women and men,Ross  Robert M,"Ross, Robert M","Queen's University (Kingston, Ontario)",Ontario,Canada,200809,1803489.0,Randomized Controlled Trials,Randomized Controlled Trials,Clinical,"Nutrition, Metabolism and Diabetes",Cardiovascular Disease; Exericise Intensity And Volume; Glucose Tolerance; Obesity; Visceral Fat; Waist Circumference,"The worldwide prevalence of abdominal obesity and associated disease and death among adults is increasing at alarming rates and requires immediate attention. Physical inactivity is a major determinant of obesity. Approximately 60% of adult Canadians are inactive; a factor that contributes to the rising prevalence of overweight that now exceeds 60%. The specific exercise strategy required to achieve optimal benefit for reduction of obesity and associated disease continues to be the source of considerable uncertainty and debate. At present health professionals know little about the specific type, amount and intensity of exercise that provides optimal or even measurable health benefit. This represents a major gap in knowledge with direct practical and clinical implications.
In response, we propose to perform a rigorously controlled randomized trial inherent to which are four key characteristics. First, the use of waist circumference as opposed to BMI as the principal obesity-related outcome variable. Second, the prescription of exercise without a reduction in caloric intake, thereby isolating the effect of exercise on the primary outcomes. Third, precise control for exercise dose (how much) and intensity (how hard) with continual adjustment for improvement in fitness throughout the study. Fourth, recruitment of abdominally obese men and women at elevated health risk.
These key features highlight our response to the limitations of prior investigations and will help resolve uncertainties regarding the utility of exercise as a means of reducing abdominal obesity and related health risk which impair the development of strategies for the promotion of obesity reduction in public health, clinical and community settings. This is timely as the number of Canadians at increased obesity-related health risk is high and increasing and hence, the development of efficacious lifestyle-based strategies designed to reduce obesity and related health risk is of paramount importance.",5 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=170510&lang=en
170515,"A Randomized Controlled Evaluation of ""Extended Specialized Early Intervention Service"" vs ""Regular care"" for Management of Early Psychosis over the Five year Critical Period",Malla  Ashok K,"Malla, Ashok K; Joober, Ridha",CIUSSS de l'Ouest-de-l'Ile-de-Montr&eacute;al-Douglas Hospital,Qu&eacute;bec,Canada,200809,2367886.0,Randomized Controlled Trials,Randomized Controlled Trials,Clinical,"Neurosciences, Mental Health and Addiction",Controlled Trial; First Episode; Multicenter; Psychosis; Routine Care; Specialized Early Intervention,"The generally poor long term outcome in schizophrenia and related psychotic disorders is established relatively early in the first five ""critical"" years after onset. Specialized Early Intervention (SEI) service is a relatively new concept in mental health and is designed to improve outcome through provision of a comprehensive package of phase specific interventions provided early in the course of these disorders. While the results of this early intervention approach to treatment of a first episode of psychosis (FEP) for outcome in the first two years are encouraging, these benefits are not sustained over the subsequent three years if the person is transferred back to routine mental health care. We, therefore, propose to conduct a randomized controlled study of FEP patients who have already received two years of specialized treatment by comparing the effectiveness of extending the SEI service for another three years with patients who after the first two years of SEI are transferred to routine care which is what they would expect to receive under current circumstances. We will also assess the cost-effectiveness of this approach. This study would provide us answers to the question whether a specialized early intervention approach should extend to the entire risk period of the first five years.",5 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=170515&lang=en
170517,Arginine methylase PRMT1 and PRMT6 in cancer and genomic instability.,Richard  St&eacute;phane,"Richard, Stéphane",CIUSSS de Centre-Ouest-de-l'Ile-de-Montr&eacute;al-Jewish General,Qu&eacute;bec,Canada,200809,877100.0,Operating Grant,Operating Grants,Biomedical,Cancer Research,Arginine Methylation; Cancer; Cell Cycle Control; Conditional Knockout Mice; Dna Damage Response; Genomic Instability,"The detection and repair of DNA damage are vital for cell viability. DNA repair defects lead to DNA translocations, deletions/ mutations, chromosome breakage leading to 'genomic instability' and cancer. Several human genetic disorders are associated with failure to repair DNA including the rare human recessive diseases include ataxia telangiectasia (AT), Nijmegen breakage syndrome (NBS), ataxia telangiectasia like disease (ATLD), Fanconi anemia, and the Bloom, Werner, and Rothmund-Thompson syndromes. We discovered that a protein modification called 'arginine methylation' is necessary to repair damaged DNA. It is known that when we expose ourselves to UV light, for example, we introduce DNA damage in our skin cells and this increases the chances of us developing cancer. We showed previously that cells without the enzymes that deposit arginine methylation accumulate DNA damage and are prone to cancer development. We were the first to show this unique role of arginine methylation and herein we propose to continue these studies. We intend to use a basic science approach to study the role of arginine methylation in the process of repairing DNA damage. Genetic (using mice models) and biochemical approaches will be utilized to define the molecular targets of arginine methylation. What are the targets of the enzymes that deposit the arginine methylation marks required for this role in DNA repair? Our work predicts that if we can inactivate the enzymes that deposit arginine methylation (methylases) this will sensitize cells to radio- and chemotherapeutic agents such that lower doses may be required in the clinic for treatment.",5 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=170517&lang=en
170520,Regulation of PAF receptor function,Rola-Pleszczynski  Marek,"Rola-Pleszczynski, Marek; Stankova, Jana",Universit&eacute; de Sherbrooke,Qu&eacute;bec,Canada,200809,719447.0,Operating Grant,Operating Grants,Biomedical,Circulatory and Respiratory Health,Cell Signaling; G-Protein-Coupled Receptor; Lipid Mediator,"Le PAF est une petite molecule bioactive qui attire et active les leucocytes. Il joue un role important dans plusieures maladies inflammatoires et allergiques, telles l'asthme et le choc septique. Son action, au niveau cellulaire, passe par une structure proteique appelee recepteur (ou PAFR) qui transmet son signal vers l'interieur de la cellule et qui l'active. Nos travaux recents nous ont permis de determiner que certaines substances peuvent reduire la transmission de certains signaux par le PAFR. Enfin, certains elements de la structure meme du PAFR semblent jouer un role essentiel dans la transmission du message activateur du PAF a la cellule et ceux-ci peuvent etre bloques par des fragments synthetiques du PAFR.
Dans le present projet, nous planifions determiner comment le PAFR est capable d'activer le leucocyte et comment cette reponse est attenuee par une retroaction negative.
Ces etudes presentent le grand interet de pouvoir definir des elements et des etapes de l'activation cellulaire par le PAF qui pourront eventuellement etre amenables a un controle pharmacologique dans le but de limiter ou prevenir les effets inflammatoires indesirables du PAF.",5 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=170520&lang=en
170521,Investigating the mechanisms of Nod-like receptor-induced cytokine release and cell death in macrophages,Kim  Sung O,"Kim, Sung O",Western University (Ontario),Ontario,Canada,200809,640450.0,Operating Grant,Operating Grants,Biomedical,Infection and Immunity,Caspase; Cell Death; Inflammasome; Lysosome; Macrophage; Mitochondria,"Macrophages are key immune cells for detecting and eliminating microbial pathogens. Many pathogens induce macrophage death as a virulence tactic to survive and disseminate within the host. Recent studies have identified a family of intracellular receptors known as  the nucleotide-binding domain and leucine-rich repeats(NLRs) which recognize intracellular microbial components. Activation of these receptors in macrophages induces rapid release of key inflammatory cytokines and macrophage cell death. Production of cytokines induces inflammation and is important for limiting microbial infections. However, rapid cell death can cause the spillage of unnecessary inflammatory mediators, resulting in overwhelming local inflammation and tissue damages, and defects in immune system by depleting macrophages. However, detailed mechanisms regarding the process of cytokine release and cell death remains to be investigated. This study is to investigate detailed signaling and molecular mechanisms of cytokine release and cell death, and examine the contribution of macrophage death during bacterial infections. This study will provide valuable and fundamental information on interactions between microbes and the host cells, and provide information on designing novel therapeutic tools for treating various bacterial and viral infections.",5 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=170521&lang=en
170522,HMG-CoA reductase in Alzheimer's Disease: Identification of a novel protective variant and unique polymorphisms that modulate Alzheimer pathophysiology.,Poirier  Judes,"Poirier, Judes",CIUSSS de l'Ouest-de-l'Ile-de-Montr&eacute;al-Douglas Hospital,Qu&eacute;bec,Canada,200809,671999.0,Operating Grant,Operating Grants,Biomedical,Aging,Alzheimer'S Disease; Cell Biology; Cholesterol; Genetics; Lipid; Molecular Biology,"This renewal proposal seeks to further characterize the molecular mechanisms involved in the loss of specific brain cells in
common Alzheimer's disease (AD). Over the recent years, our laboratory has documented a complex mechanism that
controls the synthesis, recycling and transport of the cholesterol in response to neuronal cell death and local reinnervation in the adult brain. More recently, our team has identified novel genetic anomalies (called mutations) in proteins involved in the production cholesterol in the brain that selectively destroy specific groups of brain cells in AD. This research revealed that a protein known as 3-hydroxy-3-Methylglutaryl-Coenzyme A reductase (HMG CoA reductase) which normally controls the production of cholesterol in the brain is abnormally behaving in the brain of Alzheimer subjects and accelerates the onset of the disease in some cases. Recently, we found a novel and very specific genetic variation in the same HMG CoA reductase gene that confers natural protection against common Alzheimer's disease in humans born with this peculiar genetic trait. More importantly, it provide us with important insights as to how we could to slow down disease progression with specific medications and may be, delay the onset of the disease in people who are genetically ""at risk"" of developing the disease. Accordingly, the research program submitted here for funding proposes to extend our recent findings in order to examine the fine structure of this gene, its expression level and function in the brain, to eventually determine the exact mechanisms by which of these genetic anomalies (DNA variants) in the HMG-CoA reductase gene play a role in triggering and/or protecting humans against the common form of Alzheimer's disease.",5 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=170522&lang=en
170523,From oncogenes to genomic medicine: a social and historical analysis of translational cancer research,Cambrosio  Alberto,"Cambrosio, Alberto; Keating, Peter",McGill University,Qu&eacute;bec,Canada,200809,283013.0,Operating Grant,Operating Grants,Social / Cultural / Environmental / Population Health,Health Services and Policy Research,Cancer; Genomics; History; Oncogenes; Sociology; Translational Research,"Promoters of genomic medicine, that is to say, medicine informed by the results of the recent mapping of the human genome, promise a revolution in all areas of clinical practice ranging from diagnosis to prognosis and therapeutics. From personalized medicine to genomic markers of disease and responses to therapy, the results of the application of such technologies as genome-wide mapping are expected to be wide-ranging, substantive and rapid. The purpose of the present proposal is to investigate the introduction of genomic techniques and concepts in the field of cancer medicine from two points of view: the historical and the sociological. The historical part of our study will concentrate on an analysis of the public, academic and commercial programs designed to capitalize on the therapeutic insights offered by the new molecular genetics of cancer inaugurated in the early 1980s with the discovery of the first human oncogenes. The sociological analysis will continue the study into the post-genomic era and will target the rearrangement of the relations between the laboratory and the clinic (often referred to as translational research) that results in the emergence of new collective modes of practice and interaction in the biomedical sciences.",4 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=170523&lang=en
170526,Metabolic Regulation of Toll-like Receptor Agonist Therapy in Leukemia,Spaner  David E,"Spaner, David E","Sunnybrook Research Institute (Toronto, Ontario)",Ontario,Canada,200809,380709.0,Operating Grant,Operating Grants,Biomedical,Cancer Research,Apoptosis; Cancer; Cytokines; Flow Cytometry; Glucose; Mitochondria,"Chemotherapy does not cure most cancers.  However, the results with chemotherapy may be improved with treatments that increase the ability of the immune system to kill cancer cells (or immunotherapy). We have found that a new agent (called S28690), which activates a receptor on immune cells, called Toll-like receptor 7 (or TLR7), makes tumor cells more susceptible to both chemotherapy in the test tube but is not as effective in patients. The proposed research will determine how to make S28690 more effective in patients with Chronic Lymphocytic Leukemia, which is a tumor of the blood system. If these studies are successful,a new treatment for leukemia, and possibly other cancers, will become available.",3 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=170526&lang=en
170530,Targetting and Regulation of Ion Transporters,Grinstein  Sergio,"Grinstein, Sergio",Hospital for Sick Children (Toronto),Ontario,Canada,200809,939768.0,Operating Grant,Operating Grants,Biomedical,Circulatory and Respiratory Health,Acid-Base Regulation; Fluorescence Imaging; Ion Transport; Na/H Exchange; Ph Regulation,"The acid-base balance of organisms, including humans, must be carefully regulated.  Both the pH (a measure of the concentration of acid) of cells and of the fluids that bathe them, including blood, are continuously challenged, yet maintained within very narrow boundaries.  This exquisite regulation is attributable to a family of molecules that transport acid or base across the cell membranes.  Among the most active and important transporters are the sodium/proton exchangers, a family of 9 different types of molecules widely distributed throughout the body.  Several of these have been linked to various types of neurological, vascular and renal disease.
The work described in this proposal has three separate aims: 1) Understanding how one of the prototypical sodium/proton exchangers, NHE3, interacts with and is regulated by the charge of the cell membrane; 2) To use yeast as a vehicle to express and study the NHE6-9 exchangers,  which have proven otherwise intractable and 3) To devise and implement a method to study the electrical potential that develops across the membrane of endosomes, organelles that carry cargo into the cells.   This fundamental knowledge will contribute to our understanding and eventual treatment of disease.",5 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=170530&lang=en
170533,Expanding the utility of hematopoietic stem cell products for vascular repair,Allan  David S,"Allan, David S",Ottawa Hospital Research Institute,Ontario,Canada,200809,300000.0,CIHR New Investigator,Salary Programs,Clinical,Circulatory and Respiratory Health,Blood And Marrow Transplantation; Bone Marrow; Nod/Scid Mouse Assay; Regenerative Medicine; Umbilical Cord Blood; Vascular Progenitors,"This research addresses the use of blood stem cell products to restore blood flow into damaged tissues. Blood stem cell products used for transplantation include bone marrow, peripheral blood stem cells, and umbilical cord blood. These blood products can also be transfused to assist in the repair of organ damage caused by disruptions in blood flow, termed ischemic injury.  New blood vessel formation is a critical first step in the repair of ischemic tissue damage. The precise cells and proteins that are most critical for vascular repair are not fully understood and we plan to characterize specific cell subsets that are most enriched for the ability restore healthy vasculature into damaged tissues. Further, in this research, proteins will be identified that are central to the vascular repair process. An  immunosuppressed mouse model will be used which accepts human cells. Specialized cells will be isolated and tested for their ability to form new blood vessels in the mice. This will allow for quantification and comparison of vascular function between specific cell populations from human umbilical cord blood, bone marrow, and peripheral blood stem cell products. Using an animal model for our experiments provides biological data that will be important for developing strategies that could be used in humans. Identifying proteins that are present in blood stem cell products with increased blood-forming function will allow us to characterize important signals associated with successful vascular regeneration. Biomarkers or signals will be critical for optimizing cellular regenerative therapy. Our work will provide a platform for developing cell therapy for the treatment of heart attacks, strokes, some types of kidney failure and some cases of trauma or accidents. The potential for widespread application of regenerative vascular therapy underscores the clinical importance of this emerging area and the possibility of a profound impact on the health of Canadians",5 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=170533&lang=en
170534,Brain mechanisms underlying the typical and atypical development of the mathematical brain,Ansari  Daniel,"Ansari, Daniel",Western University (Ontario),Ontario,Canada,200809,667110.0,Operating Grant,Operating Grants,Not applicable / Specified,"Neurosciences, Mental Health and Addiction",Developmental Cognitive Neuroscience; Developmental Dyscalculia; Functional Magnetic Resonance Imaging; Individual Differences; Intraparietal Sulcus; Numerical Cognition,"Most of us deal with numbers efficiently, oftentimes without being aware of it. A good example is reading a newspaper article. In the process of doing so, you will encounter several pieces of numerical information, such as dates, the number of people involved in a given incident, a statistic to illustrate a particular point etc. While the majority of us will process and integrate this numerical information seamlessly, there exist a substantial percentage of individuals whose intelligence is in the normal range, but who struggle with even the most basic numerical and mathematical information and problems. These
individuals are said to have Developmental Dyscalculia. This specific difficulty with numbers and math presents a significant impairment to educational, social and professional development. In stark contrast to the wide body of work on the causes
and symptoms of Developmental Dyslexia (specific difficulty with reading), there currently exists only a few research studies which have investigated the behavioural and brain-level characteristics of Developmental Dyscalculia. The aim of my program of research is to provide insights into the neural and behavioural roots of this disorder, in an effort to inform the design, implementation and evaluation of research-based intervention tools. More specifically, through a series of three research projects, my research lab will use brain imaging techniques to investigate a.) how individual differences in mathematical competence among typically developing children relate to brain activation and structure b.) how the brain activation and structure of children with Developmental Dyscalculia differ from children with normal mathematical skills, and c.) to understand the relationship between developmental difficulties in reading and mathematics, that is, how Dyscalculia and Dyslexia differ in terms of brain structure and function and how these groups differ from children who have both Developmental Dyscalculia and Dyslexia",5 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=170534&lang=en
170561,Mechanisms of mast cell-dependent tumor growth inhibition.,Marshall  Jean S,"Marshall, Jean S",Dalhousie University (Nova Scotia),Nova Scotia,Canada,200809,781265.0,Operating Grant,Operating Grants,Biomedical,Cancer Research,Cancer; Innate Immunity; Mast Cells,"A number of bacterial and viral products have been shown to reduce tumor growth in models of cancer and in  clincal trials, however we have a poor understadning of how these work. Mast cells are immune cells often associated with allergic disease. They are increased in numbers around solid tumors and could regulate local anti-tumor immunity.

Mast cells have been well studied in a variety of disease models and they are known to be able to initiate the development of effective immunity against a number of pathogens. Preliminary studies in Dr. Marshalls laboratory have recently shown that when activated with certain bacterial products, mast cells can reduce the rate of tumor growth in models of melanoma and lung cancer. Mast cells appear not to kill tumor cells directly but to recruit other cell types and modify the bodys response to tumors in a way that prevents tumor growth.

There are three major objectives to the current study. The first will examine how mast cells might modify the immune response to tumors by recruiting immune cells to tumor sites. The second will examine how mast cells might prevent tumors developing their own blood supply or enhance their susceptibility to immune cell killing through production of a protein called interferon-gamma. A third series of studies will examine how mast cell production of a protein known as interleukin-6 can increase anti-tumor immunity.

These studies will allow us to assess the potential of using selective mast cell activation in cancer therapy and to better understand the mechanisms whereby certain bacterial products prevent tumor growth",5 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=170561&lang=en
170562,Regulatory polymorphisms in apoptosis genes and susceptibility to childhood leukemia,Sinnett  Daniel,"Sinnett, Daniel","Centre hospitalier universitaire Sainte-Justine (Montr&eacute;al, Qu&eacute;bec)",Qu&eacute;bec,Canada,200809,410877.0,Operating Grant,Operating Grants,Biomedical,Genetics,Apoptosis; Biostatistics; Cancer Genetics; Childhood Leukemia; Electromobility Shift Assays; Gene Expression,"Acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL) is the most common pediatric cancer, but little is known about the cause(s) of this disease. We have shown that the origin of childhood ALL could be explained by the interaction between genetic factors and environmental exposures. Here we propose that the susceptibility (or resistance) to childhood ALL is modified by functional variations in the sequences regulating the expression (promoter) of genes coding for programmed cell death (apoptosis). This hypothesis will be tested by performing genetic studies in ALL children (cases) and healthy individuals (controls). The expected results will provide new knowledge on how genes and the mechanisms of gene regulation lead to disease susceptibility or resistance. In the long term, these findings will allow the development of ALL prevention programs for the population.",3 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=170562&lang=en
170570,"FLUID LAVAGE OF OPEN WOUNDS (F.L.O.W.): A Multi-center, Blinded, Factorial Trial Comparing Alternative Irrigating Solutions and Pressures in Patients with Open Fractures",Bhandari  Mohit,"Bhandari, Mohit; Guyatt, Gordon H",McMaster University,Ontario,Canada,200809,1756616.0,Randomized Controlled Trials,Randomized Controlled Trials,Clinical,Population and Public Health,Factorial Design; Fluid Irrigation; Infections; Multicenters; Open Fractures; Randomized Trial; Reoperations,"Traffic accidents ranked among the top 10 causes of global disability in 1990. By 2020, disability from traffic accidents is estimated to rank in the top 3 of all cause disability from disease - second only to ischemic heart disease and depression. The most serious injuries are those fractures that break through the skin. These so called open, or compound, fractures have serious consequences for patients including infections, wound healing problems and failure of fracture healing-many of which necessitate a secondary intervention, or re-operation.  For this reason, open fractures are designated as surgical emergencies and require urgent treatment.  In North America, an estimated 250,000 open fractures occur annually. The single most important step in the initial management of these complex injuries is a thorough wound irrigation to remove any contaminants. We aim to evaluate whether the type of irrigation solution (soap vs. saline) or irrigation pressure (low vs. high; gravity flow vs. high) will decrease the risk for re-operation among adult patients with open fracture wounds. We secondarily aim to determine the effect of irrigating solution and irrigation pressure on patient function and quality of life.  We hypothesize that soap solution may be more effective for reducing risk of infection compared to saline, and that low-pressure and gravity-flow-pressure irrigation will result in fewer re-operations than high-pressure. This trial has the potential for global impact change in resolving the current controversy with irrigation solutions and pressures for care of open fractures.",4 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=170570&lang=en
170575,Efficacy of a physical therapy intervention for the early treatment of acute ankle sprains identified in the emergency department: a randomized controlled trial,Brison  Robert J,"Brison, Robert J; Brouwer, Brenda J","Queen's University (Kingston, Ontario)",Ontario,Canada,200809,703111.0,Randomized Controlled Trials,Randomized Controlled Trials,Clinical,Musculoskeletal Health and Arthritis,Ankle Sprain; Epidemiology; Functional Recovery; Physiotherapy; Randomized Control Trial; Wounds And Injuries,"Soft tissue injuries to the ankle (ankle sprains) are common injuries treated in Canadian emergency departments.  An important proportion (up to 40%) of these injuries result in chronic functional limitations that may affect work and leisure activities. However, there is little evidence surrounding the optimal care of these injuries.  While evidence exists from studying athletes that physical therapy can be effective in the treatment of ankle injuries, similar treatments have yet to be tested in more general populations, such as those treated in emergency departments. 

We propose to conduct a randomized controlled trial in order to assess the efficacy of a physical therapy based intervention among adult patients presenting to a hospital-based emergency department with acute ankle sprains.  We will recruit approximately 500 patients for study, randomize them to one of two treatment areas (usual emergency care plus physical therapy vs. usual emergency care alone), then follow both groups and compare patient experiences with functional limitations up to six months post-injury.  

This trial is important because: 1) despite being common, there is little evidence surrounding the optimal treatment of ankle sprains in emergency department settings; 2) existing research from other clinical settings (e.g. sports injury management) suggests that physical therapy is beneficial; 3) there is a paucity of published randomized clinical trials of physical therapy interventions for the acute treatment of ankle sprains in the general population; 4) we expect that the findings will inform clinical practice for both emergency physicians and allied health professionals including physical therapists; 5) we believe the potential to reduce the burden of disability from this injury exists and this may be accomplished with early intervention",3 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=170575&lang=en
170581,Can Valacyclovir Delay the Need for Initiation of HIV Treatment in HIV-Infected Individuals with Asymptomatic Herpes Simplex Virus Type 2?,Walmsley  Sharon L,"Walmsley, Sharon L",University Health Network (Toronto),Ontario,Canada,200809,4461444.0,Randomized Controlled Trials,Randomized Controlled Trials,Clinical,Infection and Immunity,Herpes Simplex Virus Type 2; Hiv/Aids; Randomized Controlled Trial; Valacyclovir,"Highly active antiretroviral therapy (HAART) has drastically reduced the morbidity and mortality associated with HIV infection, and transformed HIV from an invariably fatal disease into a manageable, chronic condition.  However, the inconvenience, high cost, potential side effects, and significant risk of developing drug-resistant HIV associated with taking daily, lifelong HAART make the potential delay of HAART initiation an extremely desirable goal for HIV-infected individuals.

Suppression of herpes simplex virus (HSV)-2 co-infection may provide a novel therapeutic strategy for achieving this goal.  HSV-2 is among the most common co-infections seen in persons infected with HIV, with rates of up to 52-95%.  This co-infection is associated with increased blood levels of HIV, a major predictor of HIV disease progression, even when the person has no herpes symptoms.  Medications such as valacyclovir that suppress herpes can also decrease blood levels of HIV, but the potential long-term clinical benefits of this drug have not been adequately studied.  It is thus hypothesized that valacyclovir could slow HIV disease progression and prolong the period of time before a co-infected person needs to initiate HAART.

This research has been designed to answer this important question through a randomized, placebo-controlled, multi-centre clinical trial.  The study will enroll 480 HIV, HSV-2 co-infected individuals over two years from clinics participating in the Canadian HIV Trials Network (CTN) and from the HIV/AIDS Clinical Research Centre of the Oswaldo Cruz Foundation in Rio de Janeiro, Brazil.  Each participant will be randomly assigned to either valacyclovir or an identical-appearing placebo twice daily, and will be followed up with routine medical assessments and blood tests over 3 additional years.  The primary goal is to determine whether patients using valacyclovir can delay initiation of HAART by at least 9 months, compared to those taking placebo.",6 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=170581&lang=en
170582,The OSCILLation for ARDS Treated Early (OSCILLATE) Trial,Meade  Maureen O,"Meade, Maureen O; Ferguson, Niall D",McMaster University,Ontario,Canada,200809,3791391.0,Randomized Controlled Trials,Randomized Controlled Trials,Clinical,Circulatory and Respiratory Health,Acute Respiratory Distress Syndrome; Critical Care; High Frequency Oscillation; Mechanical Ventilation; Ventilator-Induced Lung Injury,"Acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS) is a common and catastrophic complication of critical illness related to burns, motor vehicle accidents, or overwhelming infection. ARDS kills 40-70% of affected patients. Patients with ARDS require life support in the form of a ventilator to breathe for them while their lungs heal. Ironically, ventilators can cause further damage to the lungs. We propose a study comparing 2 methods to protect the lungs from further damage. One method uses standard mechanical ventilators and the other uses a new type of ventilator, called a high frequency oscillator. Building on our experience with a preliminary study that showed that this is feasible, we propose to test whether this high frequency oscillation will reduce the relative risk of dying from ARDS. A total of 1200 patients will be included from 50 intensive care units in Canada and around the world.",5 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=170582&lang=en
170584,Identification and Mechanisms of Novel S100 Protein Interactions,Shaw  Gary S,"Shaw, Gary S",Western University (Ontario),Ontario,Canada,200809,752423.0,Operating Grant,Operating Grants,Biomedical,Genetics,Calcium Signaling; Nmr Spectroscopy; Protein Folding; Protein Structure; Receptor Interaction,"Many important biological processes are controlled by calcium. For example, the transmission of nerve impulses, control of vision and stimulation allowing the heart to beat can not occur without calcium. Frequently, the role of calcium is to bind to specific calcium-binding proteins in the cell, which in turn interact with other proteins or molecules to trigger a biological function. Two important proteins that fulfill this role are S100B and S100A10. In the past 2 years exciting new developments have shown that these proteins also possess calcium-independent protein interactions that impact critical biological functions. For example, both proteins have been shown to interact with receptor proteins whose dysfunction can lead to neural disorders such as depression or Parkinson's disease. Further, S100A10 has been shown to be a member of a large multiprotein complex required to close lesions in the cell membrane that result from injury. We are determining the three-dimensional shapes and interactions of two S100-receptor complexes to understand how the S100 protein controls delivery of the receptor to the plasma membrane. Details of these structures and interactions may allow synthetic molecules to be designed that stimulate or disrupt the protein-protein interaction and control neurological disease.",5 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=170584&lang=en
170586,Protein metabolism and insulin resistance in cancer cachexia:  a potential anabolic role of leucine,Chevalier  St&eacute;phanie,"Chevalier, Stéphanie",Research Institute of the McGill University Health Centre,Qu&eacute;bec,Canada,200809,374194.0,Operating Grant,Operating Grants,Clinical,"Nutrition, Metabolism and Diabetes",Gluconeogenesis; Insulin Resistance; Leucine; Lung Cancer; Protein Metabolism; Stable Isotope Kinetic Studies,"Protein loss, mostly from muscle, is very common in lung cancer and this affects the patients' physical function, response to treatment and quality of life.  We propose that cancer patients are losing proteins because they are resistant to the normal stimuli that promote protein retention after a meal, i.e. the hormone insulin and the building blocks of proteins, amino acids.  We have developed a complex metabolic test to study this and have reported that protein synthesis was not responding normally to insulin in obese, elderly, and persons with type 2 diabetes.  Now we extend our test to lung cancer patients to compare those who are losing weight to those who are not.  In addition, we will study whether their liver uses more amino acids to produce glucose, leaving less for muscle protein build-up, and for the synthesis of specific blood proteins with important functions.  Finally, a meal rich in leucine, a particular amino acid having shown promising effects on protein retention will be tested, to see if it counteracts the resistance to insulin action.  These studies could lead to design better diets and treatments aimed at preventing the loss of essential body protein and muscle in persons with lung cancer and thus improve their quality of life.",3 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=170586&lang=en
170589,Evaluating cognitive reactivity as a causal risk factor of depressive relapse,Lau  Mark A,"Lau, Mark A",University of British Columbia,British Columbia,Canada,200809,323985.0,Operating Grant,Operating Grants,Clinical,"Neurosciences, Mental Health and Addiction",Cognitive Reactivity; Cognitive Therapy; Group Therapy; Mindfulness-Based Cognitive Therapy; Mood Induction; Toronto Mindfulness Scale,"Depression is a potentially lifelong illness with a high relapse risk.  The proposed study extends our research program studying the role of cognitive reactivity as a risk factor for depressive relapse.  Cognitive reactivity, the tendency of formerly depressed individuals to experience increased negative thinking when experiencing sad mood, is associated with an increased chance of experiencing a future depressive episode for these individuals.  However, whether reducing cognitive reactivity leads to a reduced chance of experiencing a relapse of depression remains to be determined. Results from current and past research programs demonstrate that a psychological, relapse-prevention treatment, mindfulness-based cognitive therapy (MBCT) led to increased mindfulness and increased mindfulness was associated with reduced cognitive reactivity.  This establishes that cognitive reactivity can be reduced by MBCT and that mindfulness may be a mechanism underlying reductions in cognitive reactivity.  The proposed study will evaluate whether reductions in cognitive reactivity lead to reduced depressive relapse.  In addition, it will evaluate whether MBCT, which teaches mindfulness and cognitive therapy (CT) skills, is necessary to reduce cognitive reactivity or whether CT is a sufficient treatment.  In this study, formerly depressed individuals at high risk for depressive relapse will be randomly assigned to MBCT or CT or to a relaxation control group.  These participants will be assessed as to their degree of cognitive reactivity both before and after the 8-week treatment period and then followed for an 18-month period to determine whether they experience a depressive relapse.  This work has the potential to help all Canadians at risk for depressive relapse by leading to the development of more effective depression relapse prevention programs which could potentially lead to reduced rates of depressive relapse and a reduction in the overall prevalence of depression for Canadian",4 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=170589&lang=en
170617,Development of chemically modified oligonucleotide therapeutics and mechanistic probes,Damha  Masad J,"Damha, Masad J",McGill University,Qu&eacute;bec,Canada,200809,349989.0,Operating Grant,Operating Grants,Biomedical,Infection and Immunity,Anticancer And Antiviral Therapy; Biochemistry; Gene Target Knockdown; Oligonucleotide Therapeutics; Rnai And Antisense; Structural Studies On Nucleic Acids,"RNA interference (RNAi) is a natural cellular mechanism for selectively silencing the expression of genes via targeted mRNA degradation, preventing gene-coded protein production.  Synthetic oligonucleotides (ONs) that activate the RNAi pathway have tremendous potential for functional genomics, drug discovery through in vivo target validation, and novel classes of specific gene-silencing therapeutics.  Inherent characteristics of ONs have hampered their progression from the laboratory to the clinic to treat diseases.   As a result, chemical modification of these molecules to improve their specificity, potency, stability and pharmacodynamics is currently a hot topic and a major focus of our research activities.  

Our laboratory is developing chemically modified ONs that try to address several identified shortcomings of earlier generation drug candidates.  The objectives of this grant proposal are to 1] advance the development of more effective and more specific oligonucleotide-based therapies; and 2] to deepen our understanding of the biochemical properties of key enzymes implicated in the mechanism of action of nucleic acid-based drugs.  Thus, this proposal describes the design of novel chemically-modified antisense and small interfering RNA (siRNA); new chemistry that enhances the bioavailability and uptake oligonucleotides to target cells; and the evaluation of oligonucleotides comprising 2'-fluoroarabinose sugars as anti-tumor and anti-viral agents.  The experimental plan combines chemical synthesis, physicochemical studies (NMR, CD, UV), cell based assays, etc, all built on a foundation of progress during 2005-2008 in developing modified oligonucleotides as gene silencing agents.

The proposed work exposes students to nucleic acid chemistry and biology, analytical skills, and to strategies designed to develop candidate molecules into useful drugs.",3 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=170617&lang=en
170627,Role of microRNA in Major Depression and Suicide,Turecki  Gustavo X,"Turecki, Gustavo X",CIUSSS de l'Ouest-de-l'Ile-de-Montr&eacute;al-Douglas Hospital,Qu&eacute;bec,Canada,200809,767298.0,Operating Grant,Operating Grants,Biomedical,"Neurosciences, Mental Health and Addiction",Major Depression; Microrna; Neurobiology; Suicide; Vulnerability,"The major objective of this proposal is to identify microRNA differences in prefrontal cortex and hippocampus of depressed suicides compared to controls. MicroRNA are small, noncoding RNA molecules that regulate RNA expression.",5 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=170627&lang=en
170631,Hypoxia alters protein balance in muscle cells: any relation with initiation and development of muscle atrophy in COPD?,Debigare  Richard,"Debigare, Richard",Universit&eacute; Laval,Qu&eacute;bec,Canada,200809,225985.0,Operating Grant,Operating Grants,Biomedical,Musculoskeletal Health and Arthritis,Akt; Atrogin-1; Cell Culture; Copd; Hypoxia; Proteasome,"Muscle wasting is a significant problem in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) which is associated with important clinical issues such as decreased functional status, reduced quality of life and increased mortality rate. Although accumulating knowledge reveals that contractile protein degradation is the primary mechanism involved in muscle wasting, factors initiating this process in COPD is still poorly understood. Low blood oxygen levels frequently presents in COPD increasing in severity as the disease progress. Lack of oxygen has been suggested to have the potential to trigger muscle loss in human subjects. In a model of cultured muscle cells, we found that low oxygen levels altered contractile protein homeostasis with a net loss in protein content as a consequence. In this research application, we propose to investigate the relationship between low oxygen levels and inflammation in the initiation of contractile protein degradation and the development of muscle atrophy. Greater understanding of the biochemical mechanisms that are involved in peripheral muscle wasting is important to design successful therapies aimed at reversing or stopping its progression and minimizing its adverse effects.",3 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=170631&lang=en
170640,Targeting of delta opioid receptors in neuropathic pain: implications for novel therapy,Cahill  Catherine M,"Cahill, Catherine M","Queen's University (Kingston, Ontario)",Ontario,Canada,200809,500072.0,Operating Grant,Operating Grants,Biomedical,"Neurosciences, Mental Health and Addiction",Behavioural Pain Assessment; Electron Microscopy; Neuro-Glia Interactions; Neuropathic Pain; Opioid Receptors; Receptor Trafficking,"While acute pain is uncomfortable and perhaps menacing, it
serves a useful purpose in warning an organism of impending
harm. In contrast, chronic pain serves no useful purpose, is
usually out of proportion to an injury or pathology, and may
persist long after healing is complete. A recent National
Survey indicated that 3.9 million Canadians (17%) over the age of
15 have chronic pain. Neuropathic pain generally falls under the
umbrella of chronic pain and affects 2-3% of the population in
North America. Epidemiological studies have demonstrated that
70% of individuals suffering from chronic pain is rated as
moderate to severe enough to interfere with normal daily
activities and can last for months to years. Consequently,
chronic pain imposes a significant burden on society by diminishing
the quality of life of patients and their families and also has an
enormous impact on healthcare costs, and other expenditures
predicted to be over $150 billion annually in the US. However,
treatment of neuropathic pain is particularly challenging for
physicians, as this pain does not respond well to treatment. In
the current research proposal, we will investigate the potential
of a novel target (delta opioid receptors) for treating neuropathic
pain.",3 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=170640&lang=en
170643,Sleep and circadian rhythms in the middle years of life,Carrier  Julie,"Carrier, Julie",CIUSSS du Nord-de-l'Ile-de Montr&eacute;al - H&ocirc;pital Sacr&eacute; Coeur,Qu&eacute;bec,Canada,200809,472764.0,Operating Grant,Operating Grants,Clinical,Aging,Aging; Brain Imaging; Circadian Rhythms; Electrophysiology; Sleep; Vigilance,"The current overwhelming evidence that aging is associated with a significant increase in sleep-wake cycle complaints has
important individual, social and economical consequences. Multiple factors, including health problems, side effects of
medications and specific sleep disorders, account for this age-related increase in sleep difficulties. However, critical changes
in the sleep-wake cycle are also observed in optimal aging, i.e., when people do not suffer from medical, psychiatric or
specific sleep disorders. These age-related changes occur as early as the middle years of life. Between the ages of 20 and
60, increasing age is associated with less time asleep, more awakenings during sleep, less deep sleep, and more lighter
stages of sleep. With increasing age, sleep is also more vulnerable to challenges such as jet-lag or shift-work. The long term
goal of our research program is to understand the mechanisms that underlie age-related modifications of the sleep-wake
cycle. In this proposal, we will use innovative brain imaging techniques to evaluate if age-related changes in brain
morphology and activity may explain age-related changes in the sleep-wake cycle. The sleep of young (20-39 y.o.) and
middle-aged subjects (40-60 y.o.) will studied under habitual and sleep deprivation conditions. This research should provide
important answers on how aging impacts sleep oscillations in their role to protect sleep and how age-related changes in the
brain during sleep oscillations may underlie changes in vigilance and cognition. The long-term goal of our research program
is to develop preventive and therapeutic strategies for the older population based on the mechanisms underlying age-related
changes of the sleep-wake cycle.",4 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=170643&lang=en
170644,Hepadnavirus Pathogenicity in Woodchuck Model of Hepatitis B,Michalak  Thomas I,"Michalak, Thomas I",Memorial University of Newfoundland,Newfoundland and Labrador,Canada,200809,812265.0,Operating Grant,Operating Grants,Biomedical,Infection and Immunity,Hepadnaviral Lymphotropism; Hepadnavirus Persistence; Immuology Of Hepadnavirus Infection; Molecular Immunopathogenesis Of Hepadnaviral Infection; Viral Hepatitis; Woodchuck Model Of Hepatitis B,"Hepatitis B virus (HBV) is an important human pathogen implicated in a wide range of clinical manifestations, ranging from cirrhosis, liver cancer and hepatic failure to seemingly asymptomatic and undetectable, by current clinical laboratory assays, occult HBV infection. Presently, an estimated 370 million people worldwide suffer from chronic liver diseases caused by HBV, 2 billion have been exposed to the virus and could be infected at low levels, and up to one million die annually because of HBV-induced liver pathology. In Canada, ~270,000 individuals have chonic hepatitis B. There is no effective treatment to completely eridicate the virus and, despite having vaccines, the number of people infected is not declining. The mechanisms governing establishment of persistent HBV infection, chronic hepatitis and virus-induced cancer remain under investigation, although meaningfull progress has been made in some areas. Since HBV infects only humans and higher primates and it cannot be studied simply in cell cultures, appropriate animal models are of primary importance. The woodchuck infected with woodchuck hepatitis virus (WHV) constitutes the most adequate system to study HBV infection and its pathological and epidemiological consequences. This rare experimental system is very well established in the applicant's laboratory. It has been successfully applied during the last two decades to recognize virological, molecular, cellular and immunological aspects of HBV infection, hepatitis B, HBV-induced liver cancer, and anti-HBV therapy. In the current studies, the model will be utilized to further advance knowledge by investigating yet unidentified elements of the natural history of infection, mechanisms of virus persistence, and roles of viral factors and host immune responses in the development and progression of liver disease and disorders of the immune system which seem to be associated with HBV infection.",5 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=170644&lang=en
170647,"A National ""Patterns of Care"" Study in Prostate Cancer Radiation Therapy: Development and Use of Quality Indicators",Brundage  Michael D,"Brundage, Michael D","Queen's University (Kingston, Ontario)",Ontario,Canada,200809,249374.0,Operating Grant,Operating Grants,Health systems / services,Cancer Research,National Patterns Of Care; Prostate Cancer; Quality Indicators; Radiation Therapy,"Radiotherapy is an important form of treatment for cancer patients and has been shown to be useful in about 50% of patients with cancer. It can be used alone or in combination with chemotherapy or surgery to cure cancer and can help to alleviate pain and other symptoms in patients with more advanced disease.

Use of state of the art technology and knowledge has the potential to achieve the best possible outcomes for cancer patients receiving radiation therapy, but only if the knowledge and technology are being used in the best way possible. 

As part of a larger program aimed at improving cancer outcomes for patients by optimizing the accessibility and quality of radiotherapy in Canada, a national study to look at patterns of care in prostate cancer is being undertaken.  

The study has two main objectives:

1) To develop a set of Radiation Therapy indicators of quality service that can be used in cancer centres across Canada, and 
2) To determine how well Canadian cancer centres meet these quality standards.  
 
Since the information that will be collected is very similar to that used in the US, we will be able to compare results not only within Canada but also with our American counterparts. This study will be the first step in developing a standardized Canadian quality assurance program in prostate cancer radiotherapy.",2 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=170647&lang=en
170652,The pathogenic E. coli type III secretion system and its effectors,Finlay  Barton B,"Finlay, Barton B",University of British Columbia,British Columbia,Canada,200809,1046030.0,Operating Grant,Operating Grants,Biomedical,Infection and Immunity,Diarrhea; Enterohemorrhagic E. Coli; Hemolytic Uremic Syndrome; Pathogenesis; Type Iii Secretion; Virulence,"Enteropathogenic E. coli (EPEC) are a leading cause of bacterial diarrhea, causing much morbidity and mortality in children worldwide.  Enterohemorrhagic E. coli (EHEC; E. coli O157) is a close relative of EPEC which causes ""hamburger disease"" and hemolytic uremic syndrome (HUS), and was the source of the Walkerton, Ontario outbreak and a major spinach recall.  EPEC and EHEC belong to a family of attaching and effacing pathogens that adhere to intestinal epithelial cells, causing a specialized disruption on the intestinal cell surface which mediates disease.  This application addresses several fundamental questions pertaining to secreted pathogenic E. coli proteins that are virulence factors.  This includes studying the structure and function of the type III secretion system needed to secrete and inject these effectors into host cells, including protein-protein interactions and regulation of secretion.  New type III secreted factors will be identified and their contribution to disease studied in a relevant murine infection model.  In addition, molecular characterization of the mammalian proteins that these factors interact with will be examined, as will their effects on host cells and in an animal disease model.  Collectively, these studies will provide information about disease progression and the role of secreted virulence factors, which can be applied to design therapeutics and vaccines against diseases caused by these pathogens.",5 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=170652&lang=en
170657,Mechanism of Action of the Adenovirus Death Protein E4orf4,Branton  Philip E,"Branton, Philip E",McGill University,Qu&eacute;bec,Canada,200809,720706.0,Operating Grant,Operating Grants,Biomedical,Cancer Research,Adenovirus; Cancer Cells; Cell Cycle; Cell Death; Protein Complexes; Protein Phosphatase 2a,"For some time we have used human adenoviruses as models to understand the molecular basis of cancer as such studies have provided many critical insights into processes of importance for cancer.  In the present project we have identified an adenovirus protein, E4orf4, that kills cancer cells selectively and leaves normal human cells unaffected. We believe that E4orf4, or drugs that mimic its action, may provide novel avenues for cancer therapy and that if we understand exactly how E4orf4 works that we may be able to develop a drug that mimics its effects. In the present proposal we will examine details of the cancer cell killing specificity of E4orf4, examine the mechanism by which it kills, and begin the process of using this information in drug development.",5 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=170657&lang=en
170663,Control of cell proliferation and survival.,Litchfield  David W,"Litchfield, David W",Western University (Ontario),Ontario,Canada,200809,622698.0,Operating Grant,Operating Grants,Biomedical,Cancer Research,Apoptosis; Caspase; Cell Survival; Protein Kinase; Signal Transduction,"The recent success of Gleevec (imatinib) which targets the BCR-Abl protein kinase for the treatment of chronic myelogenous leukemia provides proof-of-principle for molecular-targeted therapy directed against a protein kinase.  Spurred by the success of Gleevec, this research project is focused on a close relative of BCR-Abl known as protein kinase CK2 that is present at abnormally high levels in many tumours and that causes cancer when its levels are increased in mice. We want to determine how CK2 allows cancer cells to acquire enhanced survival as compared to normal cells so that this information can be used to devise molecular-targeted therapies directed at the precise defects that underlie the disease. Over the past several years, our group has performed extensive research on the CK2 group of protein kinases with studies focused on defining how CK2 is regulated in cells and defining how CK2 is involved in the control of cell growth and survival.  To capitalize on our expertise, we will use knowledge of the three-dimensional structure of CK2 together with computational and experimental approaches to determine how CK2 modulates the regulatory networks that control cell survival.  By understanding how CK2 promotes the survival of cancer cells, we envisage that it will be possible to devise novel CK2-targeted therapies that will be effective for those forms of cancer or leukemia that are characterized by increased levels of CK2.",5 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=170663&lang=en
170666,Mechanisms and consequences of three-dimensional (3D) nuclear remodeling of telomeres in cancer,Mai  Sabine,"Mai, Sabine",University of Manitoba,Manitoba,Canada,200809,388829.0,Operating Grant,Operating Grants,Biomedical,Cancer Research,C-Myc; Genomic Instability; Spectral Karyotyping; Telomere And Interphase Nucleus; Three-Dimensional Imaging; Tumor Initiation,"We have previously shown that the structural order of the cell is changed when cells become tumor cells. To document this, we have studied one central component in the cell that is called the nucleus. The nucleus contains our genetic information. The structural order of the nucleus is what differentiates a normal cell from a cancer cell. In other words, if the order of this structure is compromised, the cell is not normal anymore. We propose to identify mechanisms through which the structural organization of the nucleus can be changed. We will define the changes that are required for cells to become cancerous. 
This study is highly relevant for our understanding of early changes that lead to cancer. In the future, we propose to use the defined changes for the screening of patients at risk of cancer, for monitoring of their disease progression and of treatment success.",3 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=170666&lang=en
170676,Signal integrators for monoamine neurotransmission,Beaulieu  Martin,"Beaulieu, Martin",Universit&eacute; Laval,Qu&eacute;bec,Canada,200809,888560.0,Operating Grant,Operating Grants,Biomedical,"Neurosciences, Mental Health and Addiction",Akt/Glycogen Synthase Kinase 3; Dopamine; Neuropsychiatric Disorders (Depression; Psychopharmacology; Schizophrenia); Serotonin; Signaling,"Monoamine neurotransmitters such as dopamine and serotonin are involved in the regulation of multiple brain functions including movement, mood and reward.  Because of this, the biological mechanisms that mediate the action of these neurotransmitters have become major therapeutic targets for the management of neuropsychiatric disorders such as depression, Parkinson disease and schizophrenia that collectively affect large segments of the population. At the cellular level, monoamine neurotransmitters exert their action by stimulating receptors that modulate behavioral responses by initiating cascades of biochemical events-also designated as signaling pathways. Most psychotropic drugs are designed to affect either the level of neurotransmitters or specific subclasses of receptors.  However these drugs have a poor specificity of action leading to the development of multiple unwanted side effects.  Furthermore, efficient treatment of psychiatric disorders often involves the modulation of more then one neurotransmitter at a time. A better understanding of the regulation of signaling pathways by monoamine neurotransmitters may allow unraveling the interplay between these different neurotransmitter systems.  In turn, this could results in the development of better therapeutic agents having lesser side effects.  Our work and the work of others have identified molecules from the Akt/GSK3signaling pathway as important mediators of the action of both dopamine and serotonin on behavior. In this project we propose to use an integrated approach involving the biochemical and behavioral characterization in genetically modified animals models to decipher the role of these signaling pathways in the regulation of brain functions.",5 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=170676&lang=en
170677,Mechanism of calpain mediated dopamine loss in PD.,Park  David S,"Park, David S",University of Ottawa,Ontario,Canada,200809,882625.0,Operating Grant,Operating Grants,Biomedical,"Neurosciences, Mental Health and Addiction",Calpains; Cdk5; Dna Damage; Dopamine; Neuronal Death; Parkinsons Disease; Substantia Nigra,"Parkinsons disease is a progressive neurodegenerative disorder characterized by loss of specialized brain cells which produce the brain molecule dopamine.   Loss of these cells results in impaired movement which is one of the significant, although not exclusive, symptoms of the disease.    Recent efforts in this field have focused on understanding the regulatory processes which control this type of death.  We have recently shown that a specific protease called calpains may participate in this process.  The present research is geared towards determining the causal nature of calpains in this process and determining how calpains mediate this degeneration.  In understanding these pathways, we hope to, not only gain an appreciation for an important basic biological process, but also devise therapeutic strategies to treat Parkinsons disease.",5 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=170677&lang=en
170691,The Clinical Investigation of Fracture Risk in Patients with Chronic Kidney Disease,Jamal  Abida Sophina,"Jamal, Abida Sophina; Lok, Charmaine E",University Health Network (Toronto),Ontario,Canada,200809,415339.0,Operating Grant,Operating Grants,Clinical,Musculoskeletal Health and Arthritis,Chronic Kidney Disease Clinic; Clinical Determinants Of Fracture In Chronic Kidney Disease; Clinical Measures Of Bone Quality; Clinical Measures Of Bone Quantity (Bmd Testing),"Broken bones (fractures) due to osteoporosis ""or thinning of the bones"" are common in men and women with kidney
disease. For example, just over half of men and women with kidney failure needing dialysis will have a fracture. Fractures
can cause sickness and even death. The number of Canadians requiring dialysis is increasing dramatically and, as such, the
number of Canadians at risk for fractures is also increasing. By preventing fractures in dialysis patients we could dramatically
improve quality of life, reduce death, and decrease health care costs. The first step in preventing fractures is to identify men
and women with kidney disease at high fracture risk before they start dialysis. Our study will identify and follow (for 2
years)200 patients with kidney disease to determine who is at risk for developing fracture and what tests can identify those
at highest risk. This study is the first step in reducing the death and disability due to fractures in patients with kidney failure.",3 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=170691&lang=en
170693,SOCS3 regulation of insulin and leptin sensitivity in obesity,Steinberg  Gregory R,"Steinberg, Gregory R",McMaster University,Ontario,Canada,200809,309327.0,Operating Grant,Operating Grants,Biomedical,"Nutrition, Metabolism and Diabetes",Amp-Activated Protein Kinase; Insulin Resistance; Leptin Resistance; Metabolism; Obesity; Suppressor Of Cytokine Signaling,"Canada is experiencing an epidemic of obesity that is contributing to diabetes, heart disease, and premature death. This
proposal investigates why being obese causes the metabolic syndrome with a specific emphasis on how muscle and fat respond to insulin. An improved understanding about how hormones regulates the body's storage and breakdown of fat and responsiveness to insulin will enable the development of new medicines for the treatment of obesity and the prevention of diabetes.",3 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=170693&lang=en
170701,Effects of enteral glutamine supplementation on mortality and infectious morbidity in severely burned patients: a multi-center pilot trial,Garrel  Dominique R,"Garrel, Dominique R",Universit&eacute; de Montr&eacute;al,Qu&eacute;bec,Canada,200809,600812.0,Randomized Controlled Trials,Randomized Controlled Trials,Clinical,"Nutrition, Metabolism and Diabetes",Enteral Glutamine Supplements; Human Subjects; Mortality; Nutrition; Sepsis; Severe Burns,"The aim of this study is to test the feasability of a multi center trial on the effects of glutamine on mortality and infectious morbidity in adult burn patient. This will include recruitment rate, compliance with institutionnal and protocol regulations, and compliance with study intervention and data collection.  Glutamine has been shown to decrease infections in patients treated in intensive care settings or after surgery. In burn patient, 2 small studies have shown decreased blood infection with glutamine administration and in one study mortality was much lower in patients with glutamine than in patients with placebo. This unexpected finding prompted us to propose a multi center study with a large number of patients. Since a trial of this mmagnitude has never been conducted we propose to conduct a feasability study that will include a fraction of the patient population recruted by a fraction of the participating centers. All clinical outcome will be measured and the study patients will be included in the final analysis, should the complete study be conducted.",2 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=170701&lang=en
170704,Light and Ion Treatment to Enhance Medication Efficacy in Depression (LITE+MED): A Randomized Controlled Trial of Light and Fluoxetine in Nonseasonal Major Depression,Lam  Raymond W,"Lam, Raymond W",University of British Columbia,British Columbia,Canada,200809,866760.0,Randomized Controlled Trials,Randomized Controlled Trials,Clinical,"Neurosciences, Mental Health and Addiction",Antidepressants; Combination; Light Therapy; Major Depressive Disorder; Placebo; Randomized Controlled Trial,"Major depressive disorder (MDD) affects up to 15% of the Canadian population and is one of the leading causes of socioeconomic burden. There are many effective treatments for MDD including antidepressants and counselling, but these treatments are not effective for everyone and they are limited by side effects and accessibility. Light and ion therapies are novel treatments that are effective for winter depression (seasonal affective disorder) and some studies show that they may be effective for nonseasonal depression. In this study, we will investigate the effects of light therapy and negative ion therapy alone and in combination with an antidepressant medication. If found effective, these non-medication treatments can be easily used by people suffering from depression.",4 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=170704&lang=en
170712,Mood Stabilizer Plus Antidepressant versus Mood Stabilizer Plus Placebo in the Maintenance Treatment of Bipolar Disorder,Yatham  Lakshmi N,"Yatham, Lakshmi N; Bond, David J",University of British Columbia,British Columbia,Canada,200809,1450636.0,Randomized Controlled Trials,Randomized Controlled Trials,Clinical,"Neurosciences, Mental Health and Addiction",Antidepressant; Bipolar Disorder; Maintenance Treatment; Mood Stabilizer; Randomized Controlled Trial,"People with bipolar I disorder (BDI) expereince episodes of both mania and depression. Manic episodes are characterized by unusually elevated mood, increased energy, and impulsivity, to the point that people often behave recklessly or dangerously. During depressions, in contrast, people feel unrelentingly sad, fatigued, and hopeless, and may even experience suicidal thoughts. Commonly used medications for BDI, such as mood stabilizers, are ineffective in preventing depressive episodes in large numbers of people. As a result, antidepressant medications are prescribed to up to 70% of people with BDI, and half of those people continue to take the antidepressant medications for 1 year or longer. While antidepressants in combination with mood stabilizers have been shown to treat acute depressive episodes, and to not be associated with with an increased risk of mania during short-term treatment, no well-desgned research studies have been carried out to determine if they help to prevent depression when taken during long-term treatment, or whether they might increase the frequency of manic episodes. We will carry out a randomized controlled trial to answer these questions. People with BDI who recently recovered from a depressive episode while taking a mood stabilizer and an antidepressant will keep taking their mood stabilizer, and will either continue the antidepressant for 1 year, or will replace it with a placebo (sugar pill) after 2 months. Neither the patients nor the researchers will know if the person is receiving the antidepressant or the placebo. People in the study will be followed regualrly to make sure thay are not relapsing into depression or mania. By carrying out this study, we will determine if antidepressant medications are safe and effective in preventing mood episodes during long-term treatment. If so, they will help to keep people with BDI well, and prevent the disability and frequent need for hospitaliation that is associated with depression.",4 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=170712&lang=en
170718,A Randomized Trial of 4 Months Rifampin vs. 9 Months Isoniazid for Latent Tuberculosis Infection. Part 3 - Effectiveness,Menzies  Richard,"Menzies, Richard",Research Institute of the McGill University Health Centre,Qu&eacute;bec,Canada,200809,4842093.0,Randomized Controlled Trials,Randomized Controlled Trials,Clinical,Population and Public Health,Latent Tb Infection; Randomized Trial; Tuberculosis Prevention; Tuberculosis Treatment,"Although effective medications to treat and prevent Tuberculosis (TB) have been available for over 60 years, TB remains the most important infectious cause of mortality among adults in the world.  One of the cornerstones of control of this disease is detection and treatment of TB infection while it is still latent, or dormant.  Nine months of daily Isoniazid (9INH) is very effective to treat latent infection, but this medication can cause serious, even fatal side effects, while the long duration of treatment makes it hard for patients to complete treatment, and increases cost. An alternate treatment, of four months daily Rifampin (4RIF) has been recommended, Since there is not much published information about this treatment, we have initiated a research program to evaluate 4RIF. We have conducted two studies with 963 patients in total to compare 4RIF with 9INH. The 4RIF treatment is safer, particularly for liver toxicity - which is important because this complication can be fatal.  As well more subjects completed a full course of 4RIF, and this treatment costs less. We are now proposing a third phase to compare the effectiveness of the two regimens in preventing active TB. Clinics in Montreal, Toronto, Saskatoon, Edmonton and Vancouver will be involved, as well as clinics in West Africa, Australia, Brazil, Ecuador, Korea, and Saudi Arabia. We plan to enroll 5818 persons, who will be randomized (i.e. assigned by chance) to take either 9INH or 4RIF. We will continue to monitor safety closely, and measure costs of treatment and follow-up. All patients who agree to take part will be followed for over 2 years, to see if they develop active TB. If 4RIF is as effective as 9INH in preventing TB, this will be a major advance, because this treatment is safer, cheaper, and easier for patients to complete.",7 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=170718&lang=en
170725,Advance planning for health care and research among older adults,Bravo  Gina,"Bravo, Gina",Universit&eacute; de Sherbrooke,Qu&eacute;bec,Canada,200809,552488.0,Randomized Controlled Trials,Randomized Controlled Trials,Health systems / services,Aging,Advance Directives; Advance Planning; Decisional Incapacity; Older Adults; Randomized Controlled Trial; Substitute Decision-Making,"A growing number of older Canadians develop diseases that gradually erode their decision-making abilities. Healthcare professionals and researchers typically turn to families when decisions about health care and research participation must be made on behalf of an incapacitated patient or prospective subject. Yet numerous studies have shown that family determinations of older adult preferences for health care and willingness to engage in research can be very inaccurate. Advance planning is a process aimed at helping people clarify and communicate their values, beliefs and preferences for future care and research involvement in the event of impaired decisional capacity. The process yields advance directives which may or not be formally expressed in writing.

This study will assess the efficacy of a multimodal advance planning intervention in 1) improving the accuracy of substitute decision-making, and 2) increasing the frequency of written advance directives for health care and research.

Subjects are community-dwelling frail adults aged 75 and over who agree to designate the person whom they would choose to make decisions for them in the event of future cognitive impairment. Elderly-proxy dyads allocated to the experimental group will meet a specially trained facilitator who will stimulate discussion within dyads about the elderly's goals of care and willingness to engage in research in the event of incapacity. Dyads will also attend a group information session on the uses, purposes and limitations of advance directives. Efficacy of the study intervention will be determined by repeated assessments of prediction accuracy and post-intervention rates of written directives. If effective, the intervention could contribute to alleviating the burden of substitute decision-making by guiding loved ones toward decisions similar to those their impaired relatives would have made, had they still been able to do so.",3 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=170725&lang=en
170729,The Role of Tim-3 in T Cell Exhaustion in HIV-1 Infection,Ostrowski  Mario A,"Ostrowski, Mario A",University of Toronto,Ontario,Canada,200809,328650.0,Operating Grant,Operating Grants,Biomedical,Infection and Immunity,Anergy; Chronic Virus Infection; Exhaustion; Hiv; T Cells; Tim-3,"One of the greatest mysteries of Human Immunodeficiency Virus Type 1 (HIV-1) infection has been to understand why the normal immune system is unable to eradicate or control this virus infection as opposed to other virus infections. Our laboratory specializes in understanding how one arm of the immune system, called the T cells, fights viruses, including HIV-1 virus, the virus that causes AIDS (acquired immunodeficiency syndrome). It has been found that these T cells that are supposed to fight HIV-1 do a bad job, and have been called dysfunctional, or exhausted. Recently a clue to why these T cells are exhausted was demonstrated by numerous publications that have identified a new molecule on the surface of these exhausted cells called PD-1. We have now identified, another new molecule on the surface of these exhausted T cells called Tim-3 (T cell immunoglobulin mucin molecule type 3). We have found that Tim-3 identifies the most exhausted of these T cells. We also show that by blocking the action of this Tim-3 molecule on the T cell, we can rescue the function of these cells to fight HIV better. The current project will try to understand why Tim-3 is increased in HIV infection in order to develop new therapies to block the actions of Tim-3 so that infected persons can fight the virus better and possibly get rid of it, as well as develop new ways of vaccinating against the virus in uninfected persons.",3 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=170729&lang=en
170733,Evaluation of Meningococcal C Conjugate Vaccine Programs in Canadian Children,Bettinger  Julie A,"Bettinger, Julie A",University of British Columbia,British Columbia,Canada,200809,699663.0,Operating Grant,Operating Grants,Social / Cultural / Environmental / Population Health,Population and Public Health,Cohort Study; Conjugate Vaccines; Infant Immunization Programs; Meningococcal Disease Prevention; Meningococcal Serogroup C Vaccination,"Infections with meningococcal bacteria are rare but cause serious, fatal illness.  Young children ages 0-5 years are at the highest risk for these infections.  Prevention is desirable, as about 15% of infected persons die, and another 15% suffer permanent injury. Infection can be prevented with an effective vaccine that is safe for use in infants and children.  The best vaccination program would provide protection throughout the peak years of risk (ages 0-5 years).  From 2003-2005 Canada started giving meningococcal vaccines to infants.  Cost factors limited doses to one dose at 12 months of age in most provinces, except for Alberta, which gives 3 doses and British Columbia (BC), which gives 2 doses. This study will identify and follow 1 year old children over five years to determine which program (1, 2, or 3 doses) and which meningococcal vaccine provides the best protection over the longest period of time.  Protection will be assessed by measuring levels of antibody against meningococcal bacteria at several times over the study. The groups will come from Nova Scotia where children receive one dose at 12 months of age; BC where children receive 2 doses at 2 months and 12 months of age; and Alberta where children receive the recommended 3 doses, at 2, 4 and 12 months of age.  Our results will provide important knowledge needed to define the best immunization program for young Canadian children.",5 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=170733&lang=en
170734,Mechanisms of ING3 deregulation and its tumor suppressive role in melanoma,Li  Gang,"Li, Gang",University of British Columbia,British Columbia,Canada,200809,569275.0,Operating Grant,Operating Grants,Biomedical,Cancer Research,Ing3; Melanoma; Metastasis; Protein Degradation; Tumor Growth; Tumor Suppressor,"Cutaneous malignant melanoma is a life-threatening skin cancer due to its high metastatic potential. The mechanism behind the high invasive property and metastatic potential of melanoma is still incompletely understood. The novel tumor suppressor ING3 has been shown to modulate gene transcription, cell cycle control, and programmed cell death. We have recently demonstrated that the nuclear ING3 expression is remarkably reduced in malignant melanoma and correlated with the progression from dysplastic nevi to primary and metastastic melanoma. This aberrant nuclear ING3 expression is also correlated with a poorer disease-specific 5-year survival of patients with primary melanoma. In this project, we will continue to delineate the molecular mechanisms controlling aberrant ING3 expression and subcellular localization and the consequent effect on ING3 tumor suppressive function in melanoma development. This project will provide in depth mechanism of ING3 deregulation in melanoma and confirm the tumor suppressive roles of ING3 in vitro and in vivo. Understanding the molecular mechanisms of controlling ING3 and its tumor suppressive functions will help us to design novel strategies for cancer prevention and treatment.",4 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=170734&lang=en
170738,The  Discovery of Death and Dying Beliefs and Practices among Low German Speaking Mennonites: Application to Best Practice Guidelines,Kulig  Judith C,"Kulig, Judith C",University of Lethbridge (Alberta),Alberta,Canada,200809,187388.0,Operating Grant,Operating Grants,Social / Cultural / Environmental / Population Health,Population and Public Health,Best Practices; Mennonite; Palliative Care; Policy Review; Qualitative Interviews; Rural Health,"The unique spiritual beliefs among Low German Speaking Mennonites (LGS) and their large population in Canada points to the need to understand their beliefs and practices about death and dying in order to ensure appropriate care is provided to this group. In collaboration with health care workers and administrators and Mennonite groups, we will collect information from LGS Mennonites to discover their beliefs and practices about death and dying. We will also interview key individuals about their experiences in caring for LGS Mennonite clients and examine policies that are used to provide palliative care for this group. With all of the information, and in discussion with health care providers, we will develop palliative care best practice guidelines for health care professionals who are involved with the LGS Mennonites.",3 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=170738&lang=en
170749,The role of the epidermal growth factor receptor and its ligands in allergen-driven airway remodelling,Martin  James G,"Martin, James G",McGill University,Qu&eacute;bec,Canada,200809,770088.0,Operating Grant,Operating Grants,Biomedical,Circulatory and Respiratory Health,Airway Remodeling; Airway Smooth Muscle; Allergy; Asthma; Epidermal Growth Factor; T Cells,"Asthma is caused by factors in the environment that act on the susceptible host, creating constriction of the airways or bronchospasm. The airways undergo changes after allergen exposure in sensitized subjects including growth of airway smooth muscle which is a likely explanation for the excessive responses to various stimuli that may subsequently cause airway narrowing. One of the mechanisms by which airway tissues grow seems to require the epidermal growth factor receptor.  This receptor can be activated by the presence of a variety of substances that bind to it and trigger a series of signals to be initiated. The aim of this grant is to investigate the relationship between allergen exposure and the growth of various airway tissues, in particular smooth muscle, and the role that the epidermal growth factor receptor and various triggers of activation of this receptor may have in the process. Human tissues and model systems will be used to investigate the scientific questions being posed.",5 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=170749&lang=en
170755,Towards the development of a pervasive prompting system for older adults with dementia: Developing the COACH task guidance system for use in the home,Mihailidis  Alex,"Mihailidis, Alex",University of Toronto,Ontario,Canada,200809,265154.0,Operating Grant,Operating Grants,Clinical,Aging,Activity Of Daily Living; Aging In Place; Cognitive Impairment; Older Adults; Prompting,"An older adult with Alzheimer's disease is often unable to independently complete activities of daily living (ADL) such as self- 
care activities, because he/she cannot remember the proper sequence of steps that must be completed.  The current solution is for a caregiver, who is typically a spouse or a child, to accompany the person and provide prompts and reminders  for each step that needs to be completed. 


Through initial funding, we have made significant progress on a technological solution to this problem.   We developed an 
automated prompting system called the COACH (Cognitive Orthosis for Assisting aCtivities in the Home), which is able to track the actions of an older adult during a specific ADL (i.e., handwashing), and provide verbal and/or visual prompts as needed.  We have proven the efficacy of this system for this particular ADL with older adults with moderate-to-severe Alzheimer's disease in a long-term care facility.   We are now preparing to expand the COACH to include other ADLs, and for use in the home.  However, we will need to implement several improvements to our current algorithms to achieve these goals. 

The objective of this project is to develop and test the necessary algorithms needed to further improve and expand the COACH to achieve our overall goal of a pervasive ADL prompting system for use in the home.   Once the system has been developed, we will conduct an efficacy study using representative ADLs. We will complete these new trials  within the homes of several older adults with Alzheimer's disease. 

This research project will have a positive effect on the lives of many older adults with AD, as well on their professional and family caregivers.  This type of system will offer further evidence that a technological approach can be used to help people with AD to remain in their own homes longer and provide them with a sense of independence and dignity.",3 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=170755&lang=en
170761,Mechanisms of natural peripheral tolerance of self and alloantigens,Anderson  Colin C,"Anderson, Colin C",University of Alberta,Alberta,Canada,200809,657300.0,Operating Grant,Operating Grants,Biomedical,Infection and Immunity,Diabetes; Flow Cytometry; Immunology; Tolerance; Transplantation,"Islet transplantation alleviates the need for daily insulin injections in Type-1 Diabetes. However, continuous immunosuppressive therapy to prevent the recipient's immune system from rejecting the islets can generate severe heath complications. To make islet transplantation safer and more widely applicable it will be necessary to learn how to make the patient's immune system tolerate the transplant. In essence, the goal is to apply to donor tissue the mechanisms that our immune system uses to prevent itself from attacking our own tissues (mechanisms of self tolerance that prevent autoimmune diseases). The ability to induce such immunological tolerance would dispense with the need to use continuous toxic immunosuppressive drug therapy to prevent islet rejection. However, we need to have much more knowledge about the natural mechanisms of immunologic tolerance if we are to apply them to donor transplants successfully.  To study the mechanisms of natural tolerance we use mice with a genetically engineered immune system (transgenic and gene knockout technology), allowing us to track the fate of immune system cells with the potential to attack donor tissue. We have discovered three conditions where immune system cells can be naturally tolerant (tolerant without drug treatment) of a donor islet transplant and cells surrounding the transplant. Our goal will be to determine the cellular and molecular details of the mechanisms involved in generating these natural states of immunologic tolerance. The data generated should help provide a better understanding the control of tolerance and immunity to transplants and open new avenues for treatment of diseases such as Type-1 Diabetes via tissue transplantation.",5 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=170761&lang=en
170762,Molecular and functional studies of ENT proteins: towards an understanding of their role in cancer therapeutics.,Young  James D,"Young, James D",University of Alberta,Alberta,Canada,200809,751305.0,Operating Grant,Operating Grants,Biomedical,Cancer Research,Cancer Therapeutics; Membrane Protein Biochemistry; Membrane Transporters; Nucleoside Drugs; Nucleoside Transport; Recombinant Dna Technology,"A number of nucleoside analogs have anticancer activities and are either in current clinical use or in various stages of preclinical evaluation.  Since the pharmacological targets of nucleoside drugs are intracellular, penetration of cells by passage across plasma membranes and, subsequently, across intracellular membrane barriers are critical determinants of drug activities and host toxicities.  We have achieved the molecular cloning and structural identification of human and rodent members of two new protein families involved in nucleoside transport across cell membranes: the equilibrative bidirectional (ENT) family and the concentrative sodium/nucleoside cotransporter (CNT) family.  The research projects described in this application will study the relationships between molecular structure and the ability of ENT proteins to move molecules across plasma and intracellular membranes.  The goal of this research is to increase our understanding of mechanisms by which cells utilize nucleosides and to use knowledge of these mechanisms to enhance the therapeutic selectivity of nucleoside drugs.",5 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=170762&lang=en
170772,Investigating the function of the LIM domain protein Zasp in muscle attachment and myofibril assembly,Schöck  Frieder,"Schöck, Frieder",McGill University,Qu&eacute;bec,Canada,200809,707510.0,Operating Grant,Operating Grants,Biomedical,Genetics,Cell-Matrix Adhesion; Developmental And Cell Biology; Drosophila; Genetic Screen; Muscle Attachment And Myofibril Assembly; Tissue Culture,"We have identified the LIM domain protein Zasp, which is involved in connecting cells to their environment. This connection is mediated by integrins, proteins that sit in the plasma membrane surrounding each cell. Zasp carries a protein domain that targets it to the intracellular side of integrin adhesion sites, where Zasp is crucial for the assembly and regulation of integrin adhesion sites. Zasp functions largely in muscles, and in muscles integrin adhesion sites connect muscles to tendons and along the length of the muscle to the surrounding connective tissue. Zasp is required to assemble the latter and regulate the former adhesion site. Without Zasp the internal, highly repetitive muscle structures also fail to assemble. We analyze Zasp using an array of cell biological and genetic techniques to learn more about muscle attachment and muscle fiber assembly in the fruit fly Drosophila. Zasp is highly conserved in humans, and we already know that humans with mutations in the protein corresponding to Zasp develop cardiomyopathy, which eventually results in heart failure. Investigating Zasp in a simple model organism will therefore increase our understanding of muscle diseases and basic muscle biology.",5 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=170772&lang=en
170779,Molecular mechanisms of cardiac development,Michalak  Marek S,"Michalak, Marek S",University of Alberta,Alberta,Canada,200809,866390.0,Operating Grant,Operating Grants,Biomedical,Circulatory and Respiratory Health,Calcium Homeostasis; Calreticulin; Cardiogenesis; Chaperones; Congenital Heart Diseases; Endoplasmic Reticulum; Transcription,"Heart malformations present at birth represent the single largest class of birth defects in humans, and are the leading cause of death in infants under one year old. Despite significant advances in our understanding of the heart in the past decade, the regulatory pathways responsible for heart formation remain poorly understood. Without an understanding of cardiac development and normal and abnormal processes within the heart, it will not be possible to develop new and more efficient ways to cure cardiac diseases. Heart defects observed in babies include structural abnormalities of the heart, primary cardiac muscle disorders, and disturbances in heart beat. The objective of our work is to understand, at the molecular level, events associated with heart development and heart disease present at birth. Furthermore, our research focuses on the development of basic and clinical tools for the treatment of cardiac diseases. A better understanding of the molecular events associated with the cells in the unborn baby that will eventually become heart cells, will provide invaluable information for future development of cell and drug therapies for treatment of many cardiac diseases. The understanding obtained from the proposed studies will provide invaluable information on the use of stem cells as potential tools for cell therapy in cardiac diseases. Our research will also have a major impact on the advancement of research and general knowledge.",5 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=170779&lang=en
170781,Pathogen adaptation and AIDS-associated Cryptococcosis,Kronstad  James W,"Kronstad, James W",University of British Columbia,British Columbia,Canada,200809,586484.0,Operating Grant,Operating Grants,Biomedical,Infection and Immunity,Animal Model; Fungal Disease; Gene Deletion; Microarrays; Transcription,"This project focuses on understanding the ways in which deadly fungal pathogens attack people with weakened immune systems.  In particular, the project will study the fungal pathogen Cryptococcus neoformans.  This pathogen is the most common cause of life-threatening brain infections in people with acquired immune deficiency syndrome (AIDS).  The project will test whether an animal model of AIDS is useful for studying ways to treat infections caused by Cryptococcus neoformans.  In addition, possible new targets for drug therapies will be examined.",4 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=170781&lang=en
170783,Functional Characterization of Bone Sialoprotein,Goldberg  Harvey A,"Goldberg, Harvey A; Hunter, Graeme K",Western University (Ontario),Ontario,Canada,200809,550272.0,Operating Grant,Operating Grants,Biomedical,Musculoskeletal Health and Arthritis,Biomineralization; Bone Formation And Repair; Collagen Binding; Hydroxyapatite; Nucleation; Osteoblast Differentiation; Physical Chemical Characterization Of Hydroxyapatite; Protein Structure And Function,"The organic matrices of mineralized tissues consist principally of type I collagen and a variety of non-collagenous proteins.  These proteins are postulated to have critical roles in tissue development and the mineralization process.  Studies conducted in our laboratories and elsewhere have shown that one of these proteins, bone sialoprotein, is a multifunctional protein that can interact with the mineral, cells and collagen. Bone sialoprotein can initiate mineral formation, promote osteoblast differentiation and thus new bone formation, in addition to activating osteoclasts, cells that resorb mineralized tissues.  Using a wide spectrum of physical, chemical, biochemical and molecular techniques this study will focus on bone sialoprotein-collagen-mineral interactions.   These studies will provide important information on the fundamental mechanism of mineralization in bone, and may lead to the development of novel therapeutic agents for the promotion of bone repair.",4 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=170783&lang=en
170786,"Attachment Theory, Chronic Pain, and Treatment Outcomes: A Longitudinal Investigation",Kowal  John,"Kowal, John",Ottawa Hospital Research Institute,Ontario,Canada,200809,180842.0,Operating Grant,Operating Grants,Clinical,Musculoskeletal Health and Arthritis,Adult Attachment; Chronic Pain; Longitudinal Design; Psychosocial; Treatment Outcomes,"Chronic pain is a complex, prevalent, and costly health condition. Between 9 and 29 percent of Canadian adults live with chronic pain. Attachment Theory is a developmental, interpersonal framework that has considerable potential to further understanding of chronic pain-related treatment and disability. This theory posits that early interactions with primary caregivers, especially those related to affect regulation and coping with distress, form the basis of enduring interpersonal patterns. Despite a paucity of research on adult attachment and chronic pain, recent reviews published in prestigious academic journals have called for additional empirical work in this area. The proposed research addresses this call through a number of related lines of inquiry. The prevalence of adult attachment styles in individuals with chronic pain remains largely unknown and will be estimated. Associations among adult attachment styles and key pain-related and psychological variables (e.g., mood, fears, and coping) will be examined. Associations among adult attachment dimensions and treatment-related variables and outcomes (e.g., adherence, and health care utilization) will be evaluated longitudinally. Finally, the proposed research will examine associations among patients' and significant others' attachment dimensions. The proposed research will be conducted in an interdisciplinary, outpatient chronic pain management program at a rehabilitation hospital. The proposed project is timely, clinically-relevant, theoretically-driven, and methodologically feasible. It will employ a longitudinal design in which data are collected at four time-points. The proposed research has the potential to increase understanding of the role of interpersonal variables in the experience of chronic pain and chronic pain treatment. Given the paucity of research in this area, the proposed research has the potential to make unique, novel contributions to the scientific literature.",3 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=170786&lang=en
170791,The BeAMS Study. Long-term Benefits and Adverse Effects of Beta-interferon for Multiple Sclerosis,Tremlett  Helen L,"Tremlett, Helen L",University of British Columbia,British Columbia,Canada,200809,418612.0,Operating Grant,Operating Grants,Clinical,Population and Public Health,Data Linkage; Drug Adverse Effects; Drug Effectiveness; Epidemiology; Health Care Utilization; Multiple Sclerosis,"Multiple Sclerosis (MS) is a relatively common disease of the brain and spinal cord, leading to disability, severe fatigue, and coordination problems; its cause is unknown. Canada has some of the world's highest rates; three more Canadians are diagnosed with MS everyday. There is no known cure and available drugs, such as the beta-interferons (IFNB), are only partially effective, require frequent injections and are very expensive. Most studies focus on how well these drugs work in the short-term, and only against certain facets of MS, whereas in reality, patients maybe on these drugs for many years. We do not fully know about all the possible long-term benefits and side effects associated with their use. Given the estimated 75,000 people with MS in Canada, and the increasing popularity of the MS drugs, the long-term beneficial effects of these drugs could translate into a substantial improvement in the health of people with MS. Conversely, if not effective, then many people could be unnecessarily exposed to these drugs. There have been few studies as large as ours investigating a range of possible side effects, including  depression. In addition, we will examine whether the IFNBs have beneficial or even harmful effects which are more difficult to measure, but could result in overall changes to health service usage such as hospital admissions and physician visits as well as employment-related issues. This research brings together for the first time data collected for over two decades by physicians and pharmacists contributing to multiple large health databases. This important research will help develop a framework in which to evaluate the benefits and side effects of future new drugs for MS. Our study is a cost-effective way of spending research dollars, costing the equivalent of placing just six people with MS on IFNB treatment for five years. The study will benefit from its independence from the pharmaceutical industry, the manufacturers of IFNB.",3 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=170791&lang=en
170793,Macrophage Activation by Drugs Leading to Autoimmunity,Uetrecht  Jack P,"Uetrecht, Jack P",University of Toronto,Ontario,Canada,200809,532920.0,Operating Grant,Operating Grants,Biomedical,Population and Public Health,Adverse Drug Reactions; Autoimmunity; Drug Safety,Drugs can cause serious side-effects.  Some of these side-effects are mediated by the immune system (a type of allergic reaction) and are very unpredictable.  We are trying to understand the basic of these side-effects so that drugs can be designed so that they are less likely to cause such adverse reactions and so that we can better predict who is likely to have such adverse reactions.,5 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=170793&lang=en
170794,Role of cellular Inhibitors of Apoptosis (cIAPs) in muscle,Korneluk  Robert G,"Korneluk, Robert G",Children's Hospital of Eastern Ontario Research Institute Inc,Ontario,Canada,200809,374661.0,Operating Grant,Operating Grants,Biomedical,Genetics,Iap; Muscular Dystrophy; Nf-Kb; Skeletal Muscle Atrophy; Skeletal Muscle Regeneration; Tumor Necrosis Factor,"The Nuclear Factor kappaB (NF-kappaB) signaling pathway is a complex signaling module that is critical for normal skeletal muscle function, such as promoting recovery in response to muscle injury.  However, there is strong evidence that NF-kappaB signaling is also involved in the pathology associated with various muscle diseases, such as Duchenne's muscular dystrophy (DMD), inflammatory myopathies, and skeletal muscle atrophy.  As such, NF-kappaB has become an attractive drug target for the treatment of muscle disease.  We have recently found that the cellular inhibitor of apoptosis (cIAP) 1 protein, a protein cloned in our laboratory and previously implicated in the regulation of cell death, is required for various aspects of NF-kappaB signaling in skeletal muscle.  This discovery has raised the exciting possibility that cIAP1 may be a potential therapeutic target for various muscle diseases that rely on NF-kappaB signaling.  We propose to elucidate the role and mechanism of action cIAP1 in NF-kappaB signaling in skeletal muscle, and evaluate its contribution to the pathology of muscular dystrophy.  Moreover, as we have in hand several drugs that potently and specifically target cIAP1 for destruction, we will evaluate the therapeutic potential of these drugs in the treatment of muscular dystrophy.",3 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=170794&lang=en
170797,End-user support in the implementation of Electronic Health records in primary care: a case study of early adopters.,Shachak  Aviv,"Shachak, Aviv",University of Toronto,Ontario,Canada,200809,170289.0,Operating Grant,Operating Grants,Health systems / services,Health Services and Policy Research,Case Study; Electronic Health Record; End-User Support; Implementation; Primary Care,"Electronic health Record (EHR) systems have the potential to improve patient safety and quality of care, as well as reduce the costs associated with health care. Canada is still lagging behind other developed countries in the adoption and use of EHR, especially in primary care. Efforts to close this gap, with investments of billions of dollars are made, both at the federal and provincial levels. Much of the present efforts concentrate on facilitating the purchase of EHR systems by clinicians. As these efforts are likely to result in more physicians using EHR systems, it becomes important to ensure that these systems are being used effectively.

One factor, which may contribute to the success of EHRs is the support provided to the end-user. Support, broadly defined, may be provided by formal bodies (e.g. the vendor's support unit), or informally by colleagues and other non-official information sources. it encompasses a wide variety of activities ranging from hardware and software installation, through maintanance and technical problem solving to training and consultation. A better understanding of end-user support will allow adapting it to the needs of practitioners and the primary care setting. This will enable practitioners to better use EHR systems, and will ultimately lead to improved or more efficient family health care

In this study, we propose to investigate the ways in which end-user support affects a number of EHR success factors: a) the quality of EHR systems; b) the quality of the information documented in EHRs; c) the way clinicians use the system; d) user satisfaction and e) the impact on quality of care at the individual and system levels. We will employ a case study approach, using primarily qualitative methods such as document analysis, interviews, focus groups and shadowing.",2 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=170797&lang=en
170806,Agenda setting strategies and processes in healthcare privatization debate,Contandriopoulos  Damien,"Contandriopoulos, Damien",Universit&eacute; de Montr&eacute;al,Qu&eacute;bec,Canada,200809,247826.0,Operating Grant,Operating Grants,Health systems / services,Health Services and Policy Research,Agenda Setting; Indirect Lobbying; Media; Policy Making; Privatization; Public Opinion,"Privatization of healthcare system financing and delivery has been on and off Canadian reform agendas for the past 20 years. During the past decade, it became a central feature of the reform discourse in Canada at large, but this trend has accelerated in Quebec following the Chaoulli ruling of the Supreme Court of Canada in June 2005, which set the table for active agenda-setting efforts around specific healthcare financing policy proposals. In this context, the proposed research has two overarching objectives. The first is to understand current policy-making processes resulting from the interactions between policy proposals, interest groups, public opinion and the media. In this regard, the healthcare financing debate in Quebec constitutes a revelatory case to understand broader but under-investigated policy processes. The second objective focuses on the privatization debate itself. The goal is to provide empirical data on the evolution of the privatization policy arena and on the processes and forces that drive it. Such evidence will be directly useful to researchers and decisions-makers as well as to the general public. It will lead to a better understanding of policy processes that potentially have a tremendous impact on health policies and, ultimately, on the health of all Canadians.",3 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=170806&lang=en
170809,Nitric oxide and thioredoxins in human T cell survival,Choy  Jonathan C,"Choy, Jonathan C","Simon Fraser University (Burnaby, B.C.)",British Columbia,Canada,200809,300000.0,CIHR New Investigator,Salary Programs,Biomedical,Infection and Immunity,Apoptosis; Human T Cell; Nitric Oxide; Thioredoxins; Transplantation,"Organ transplantation is a life-saving procedure for many individuals.  Unfortunately, rejection of transplanted organs by the recipient immune system is a major hurdle to the long-term success of this procedure.  T cells are specialized cells within the immune system that recognize and damage transplanted organs, thereby playing an important role in causing organ transplant rejection.  For this reason, it is important to understand how T cell responses are controlled in this setting in order to develop ways to increase the long-term acceptance of transplanted organs.  In general, the extent of T cell activation is controlled by the amount of both cell proliferation and death.  A considerable amount is known about how T cell proliferation is regulated during transplant rejection.  However, relatively little is known about how T cell death and survival are controlled in transplanted organs, and how this biological process contributes to T cell reactions in this setting.  Using human cells and tissues, the current work will investigate how T cell survival and persistence is regulated in transplanted arteries, and the contribution of this to organ transplant rejection.  All together, the work will provide unique insight into the mechanisms by which T cells cause transplant rejection, with a particular emphasis on biological processes occurring in humans.",5 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=170809&lang=en
170811,Determining the effects of monoaminergic regulation of frontostriatal systems in different aspects of impulsive decision-making.,Winstanley  Catharine A,"Winstanley, Catharine A",University of British Columbia,British Columbia,Canada,200809,300000.0,CIHR New Investigator,Salary Programs,Biomedical,"Neurosciences, Mental Health and Addiction",Dopamine; Frontal Cortex; Gambling; Impulsivity; Serotonin; Subcortical,"Impulsivity is a characteristic of human behavior that can be both beneficial and detrimental in our everyday lives.  An impulsive decision can allow us to seize a valuable opportunity or make a disastrous choice which we live to regret.  High levels of impulsivity are not only considered socially unacceptable, but they are a key symptom in a range of psychiatric illnesses including bipolar disorder, attention-deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD), pathological gambling, personality disorders and substance abuse.  Understanding the neurobiological basis of impulsivity could therefore provide valuable insight into these afflictions and potentially lead to the development of novel therapeutic strategies.  In this grant, we propose to explore the role of different regions of the brain on aspects of impulsive decision-making and gambling using tests which measure these cognitive processes in rats.  We also want to determine whether changing levels of brain chemicals such as dopamine and serotonin within these different brain regions can affect impulsive choice.",5 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=170811&lang=en
170812,Nitric oxide and thioredoxins in human T cell survival,Choy  Jonathan C,"Choy, Jonathan C","Simon Fraser University (Burnaby, B.C.)",British Columbia,Canada,200809,277179.0,Operating Grant,Operating Grants,Biomedical,Infection and Immunity,Apoptosis; Nitric Oxide; Organ Transplantation; T Cell; Thioredoxins; Transplant Vasculopathy,"Organ transplantation is a life-saving procedure for many individuals.  Unfortunately, rejection of transplanted organs by the recipient immune system is a major hurdle to the long-term success of this procedure.  T cells are specialized cells within the immune system that recognize and damage transplanted organs, thereby playing an important role in causing organ transplant rejection.  For this reason, it is important to understand how T cell responses are controlled in this setting in order to develop ways to increase the long-term acceptance of transplanted organs.  In general, the extent of T cell activation is controlled by the amount of both cell proliferation and death.  A considerable amount is known about how T cell proliferation is regulated during transplant rejection.  However, relatively little is known about how T cell death and survival are controlled in transplanted organs, and how this biological process contributes to T cell reactions in this setting.  Using human cells and tissues, the current work will investigate how T cell survival and persistence is regulated in transplanted arteries, and the contribution of this to organ transplant rejection.  All together, the work will provide unique insight into the mechanisms by which T cells cause transplant rejection, with a particular emphasis on biological processes occurring in humans.",3 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=170812&lang=en
170813,"Study to Assess Longer-term Opioid Medication Effectiveness (SALOME): Multi-centre, double blind Randomized Controlled  Trial comparing the efficacy of Diacetylmorphine vs. Hydromorphone for the treatment of long-term Injection Opiate Users who do not benefit from available therapies",Krausz  Reinhard M,"Krausz, Reinhard M; Oviedo-Joekes, Eugenia",University of British Columbia,British Columbia,Canada,200809,999997.0,Randomized Controlled Trials,Randomized Controlled Trials,Clinical,"Neurosciences, Mental Health and Addiction",Maintenance Treatment; Opioid Dependence; Randomized Clinical Trial; Therapeutic Use Of Narcotics,"Inner city populations, particularly injection drug users, are at 
extremely high risk of many drug related harms including HIV, 
hepatitis C and overdose death. While some treatments exist, 
they are not optimal and people with the most severe cases of 
heroin addiction remain outside of the health care system. To 
improve the treatment of addiction, my colleagues and I are 
conducting innovative clinical trials that are testing whether 
medically prescribed heroin is a safe and effective treatment 
that improves on currently available therapies. We are also 
testing if pills can be used instead of injections and whether 
licensed medications can be used instead of heroin. We will give 
special attention to women and how they respond to the 
treatments we are testing. The ultimate goal of this research is to 
benefit both people with the most severe cases of heroin 
addiction as well as their communities.",3 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=170813&lang=en
170815,Examining the cellular basis of cognitive deficits in an animal model of schizophrenia,Seamans  Jeremy K,"Seamans, Jeremy K",University of British Columbia,British Columbia,Canada,200809,397590.0,Operating Grant,Operating Grants,Biomedical,"Neurosciences, Mental Health and Addiction",Cognition; Electrophysiology; Multiple-Unit; Prefrontal Cortex; Schizophrenia; Working Memory,"Schizophrenia is associated with three main classes of symptoms, termed positive, negative and cognitive symptoms. Positive symptoms such as hallucinations and delusions are well treated by modern antipsychotic medications, as are negative symptoms to varying degrees. On the other hand, cognitive symptoms are not. Cognitive symptoms include deficits in working memory, attention and response flexibility and may be a core feature of the disease emerging before other symptom classes. It is now well established that dysfunction of the prefrontal cortex (PFC) is a key feature of the cognitive symptoms in schizophrenia. A critical question therefore is what happens to networks of cells in the PFC that could lead to cognitive symptoms? While current methodologies prevent addressing questions of cellular mechanisms in humans, there are numerous well-established rodent models of schizophrenia, including neonatal ventral hippocampal model. By recording up to hundreds of neurons simultaneously in behaving rats, we hope to understand what happens to networks of cells in the PFC when ""schizophrenic"" animals fail on cognitive tasks similar to those that schizophrenic patients fail on. We also hope to determine what changes in the networks are, and what changes are not affected by administration of medications used in patients. It is hoped that this approach will provide critical new insights into cellular basis of cognitive dysfunction in schizophrenia and perhaps lead to treatments for these currently untreatable symptoms.",5 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=170815&lang=en
170817,Role of the AMP-activated protein kinase (AMPK) in stress resistance and cancer,Jones  Russell G,"Jones, Russell G",The Rosalind and Morris Goodman Cancer Centre,Qu&eacute;bec,Canada,200809,300000.0,CIHR New Investigator,Salary Programs,Biomedical,Cancer Research,Amp-Activated Protein Kinase (Ampk); Apoptosis; Cancer Biology; Cellular Metabolism; P53; Tumour Suppressors,"Cell division is a highly regulated process.  The ability of a cell to successfully grow and divide partly depends on the cell having enough energy and building blocks to complete the task.  Cancer is essentially a disease in which cells lose their normal restraints on cell division.  Cancer cells often display fundamental changes in energy generation and metabolism to allow them to grow and divide, although our understanding of how cancer cells achieve this is poor.  The strategy of our lab has been to investigate how metabolism and energy use is altered in tumours in the hope of identifying new ways to treat cancer.  We have identified a key regulator of cellular metabolism known as the AMP-activated protein kinase, or AMPK.  We have found that AMPK acts as a rheostat in cells, and stops cell growth and division when it senses changes in energy levels.  AMPK does so in part by interacting with several well-known tumour suppressors including p53, which is mutated in over 50% of human cancers. This proposal aims to study how AMPK helps cells adapt to environmental stress, and to study the role AMPK may play in cancer progression. Ultimately we would like to determine whether AMPK is a suitable therapeutic target for the treatment of cancer.",5 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=170817&lang=en
170819,Role of the AMP-activated protein kinase (AMPK) in stress resistance and cancer,Jones  Russell G,"Jones, Russell G",The Rosalind and Morris Goodman Cancer Centre,Qu&eacute;bec,Canada,200809,533730.0,Operating Grant,Operating Grants,Biomedical,Cancer Research,Amp-Activated Protein Kinase (Ampk); Apoptosis; Cancer Biology; Cellular Metabolism; P53; Tumour Suppressors,"Cell division is a highly regulated process.  The ability of a cell to successfully grow and divide partly depends on the cell having enough energy and building blocks to complete the task.  Cancer is essentially a disease in which cells lose their normal restraints on cell division.  Cancer cells often display fundamental changes in energy generation and metabolism to allow them to grow and divide, although our understanding of how cancer cells achieve this is poor.  The strategy of our lab has been to investigate how metabolism and energy use is altered in tumours in the hope of identifying new ways to treat cancer.  We have identified a key regulator of cellular metabolism known as the AMP-activated protein kinase, or AMPK.  We have found that AMPK acts as a rheostat in cells, and stops cell growth and division when it senses changes in energy levels.  AMPK does so in part by interacting with several well-known tumour suppressors including p53, which is mutated in over 50% of human cancers. This proposal aims to study how AMPK helps cells adapt to environmental stress, and to study the role AMPK may play in cancer progression. Ultimately we would like to determine whether AMPK is a suitable therapeutic target for the treatment of cancer.",4 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=170819&lang=en
170828,Functional analysis of Parkinson's disease-related genes in zebrafish.,Ekker  Marc,"Ekker, Marc",University of Ottawa,Ontario,Canada,200809,282903.0,Operating Grant,Operating Grants,Biomedical,"Neurosciences, Mental Health and Addiction",Dopaminergic Neurons; Mitochondria; Parkinson'S Disease; Pink1; Zebrafish,"We are using the zebrafish to understand the function of genes that are associated with early onset Parkinson's disease in humans. Zebrafish have counterparts of these genes and offer several advantages to understand how the altered function of these genes causes Parkinson's disease. We are inactivating these genes in the zebrafish and are determining how the control of movement and the biology of specific neurons in the brain associated with movement control are affected. Furthermore, zebrafish can be used to screen for molecules that impact on the function of these neurons and, therefore, provide clues that will be used in the development of novel therapies. This research will help understand the causes of this important neurological disease affecting many Canadians.",3 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=170828&lang=en
170829,Control of movement: Regulation of the pattern of locomotion,Brownstone  Robert M,"Brownstone, Robert M",Dalhousie University (Nova Scotia),Nova Scotia,Canada,200809,773392.0,Operating Grant,Operating Grants,Biomedical,"Neurosciences, Mental Health and Addiction",Central Pattern Generator; Electrophysiology; Interneurons; Locomotion; Spinal Cord; Spinal Cord Injury,"This application addresses one disability of people with spinal cord injuries and diseases: the inability to walk. The spinal cord of mammals (including humans) contains a network of nerve cells which produces the basic pattern of walking in the absence of connection with the brain. Details of the mechanisms of this network have been elusive.

During walking, there is very strict alternation between muscles that flex and those that extend every joint. This alternation is critical for the production of coordinated movement. If flexor and extensor muscles are active at the same time, the joint would not bend, and there will be no movement. Muscles receive their commands from specialised nerve cells called ""motor neurons,"" which receive alternating commands from other spinal cord nerve cells, called interneurons. There are two basic types of nerve cells providing the alternating on and off commands to motor neurons - excitatory and inhibitory interneurons. 

I propose to study these two types of nerve cells in order to understand how the motor neurons (and hence the muscles) are activated during walking and how sensory information from the limbs uses these two types of interneurons to ensure that appropriate muscle contraction takes place with changing limb position. 

These experiments will be done using genetically-modified mice and advanced microscopy techniques which together allow visualisation of the activity of identified interneurons, and manipulation of this activity. By combining many different techniques, we will be able to study the role of these neurons in producing coordinated movement.
 
By the conclusion of the 5-year granting period, we will have a greater understanding of how the spinal cord controls the activation pattern of muscles, and how sensory information interacts with this fundamental network. This knowledge will assist in the development of strategies to improve the function of people living with spinal cord injuries and diseases.",5 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=170829&lang=en
170844,Natural history of oropharyngeal cancer precursors: a pilot study,Rousseau  Marie-Claude,"Rousseau, Marie-Claude; Nicolau, Belinda F","INRS - (Qu&eacute;bec, QC)",Qu&eacute;bec,Canada,200809,306721.0,Operating Grant,Operating Grants,Social / Cultural / Environmental / Population Health,Cancer Research,Biomarker; Cohort; Gene Profiling; Human Papillomavirus Infections; Methylation; Oropharyngeal Cancers,"Previous studies have shown that certain types of cancer begin as lesions appearing in different parts of the body. This study aims to investigate these lesions in the mouth and throat to determine which factors lead to the development of cancers in these areas. For this purpose we are going to conduct an international study involving subjects from Canada, USA, Brazil and South Africa. The present application is to obtain funding for the Canadian component, for a small ""pilot"" study. Eventually, this initial study will lead to a larger one in which we will follow a group of people who have these early lesions to monitor the development of disease. We are using sophisticated genetic techniques, as well as an interview to identify those at risk of developing cancer in the mouth and throat. The results of this study will help to clarify if there is a specific group of people who are more at risk to develop the disease. Identifying those at highest risk will allow us to design
an effective health program to prevent development of mouth and throat cancers at an early stage.",3 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=170844&lang=en
170846,Molecular Therapeutic Strategies for Ex-vivo Repair of Lungs for Transplantation,Keshavjee  Shaf,"Keshavjee, Shaf",University Health Network (Toronto),Ontario,Canada,200809,774344.0,Operating Grant,Operating Grants,Biomedical,Circulatory and Respiratory Health,End Stage Pulmonary Failure; Gene Therapy; Inflammation; Lung Injury; Lung Transplantion; Molecular Mechanisms Of Ischemia Reperfusion Injury,"Lung transplantation (LTx) has become life saving therapy for patients suffering from many types of end-stage lung diseases (e.g. emphysema, pulmonary fibrosis, pulmonary hypertension and cystic fibrosis). Most patients that are fortunate enough to receive new lungs are alive 5 years after transplantation with a much improved quality of life. Unfortunately, the number of patients requiring LTx largely exceeds the number of lung donors available. As a result, the death rate on the waiting list is 20%-30% in most lung transplant centers.
Clearly, the best alternative will be to expand the number of donors. Indeed, on average we currently are able to transplant only 15% - 25% of the lungs that are offered to us from brain dead donors; 75 - 85% of donor lungs cannot be used because they are damaged (e.g. inflammation, pneumonia, etc.). Attempts to use these lungs for transplantation carry a risk of increased complications. Hence, strategies to repair injured donor lungs would significantly increase the number and safety of LTx   performed every year.
Our project aims to develop a new strategy of donor lung treatment and repair using ex vivo (outside the body) gene therapy (a beneficial gene is inserted into the lungs cells which in turn produce a new protein in order to heal the surrounding cells). Damaged pig and human lungs will be placed in a special pump perfusion system (that simulates physiologic conditions) and treated with IL-10 (a potent anti-inflammatory molecule) gene therapy. We will be able to evaluate the lung function in this system to document improved lung function and then confirm improved function after transplantation. We will also find new markers of donor lung injury and repair, so that in the future only truly repairable donor lungs will be used.
The consequent improvement in the quality of donor lungs with ex vivo assessment and gene therapy will have a significant impact in improving outcomes of lung transplantation",5 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=170846&lang=en
170849,A Unifying Mechanism for the Anti-inflammatory Effect of Phosphodiesterase 4 Inhibitors in Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease,Giembycz  Mark A,"Giembycz, Mark A",University of Calgary,Alberta,Canada,200809,669215.0,Operating Grant,Operating Grants,Biomedical,Infection and Immunity,15-Lipoxygenase; Airways Inflammation; Copd; Cyclic Nucleotides; Peroxisome Proliferator-Activated Recepotor Gamma; Phosphodiesterase 4 Inhibitors,"Phosphodiesterase (PDE) 4 inhibitors are a new class of drugs being developed for the treatment of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD), which is more commonly referred to as bronchitis and/or emphysema. The results of several clinical trials in subjects with COPD suggest that PDE4 inhibitors can slow the development of this disease. Hoewever, exactly how this novel class of drugs do this has not been investigated and, accordingly, is not understood. Clearly, a complete appreciation of how PDE4 inhibitors work in COPD is a desirable objective if their effectiveness is to be optimized or, ideally, enhanced.",5 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=170849&lang=en
170855,Understanding virological and host determinants of HIV disease progression in a cohort of slow progressors,Tremblay  C&eacute;cile L,"Tremblay, Cécile L; Bernard, Nicole F",Centre hospitalier de l'Universit&eacute; de Montr&eacute;al (CHUM),Qu&eacute;bec,Canada,200809,983939.0,Operating Grant,Operating Grants,Clinical,Infection and Immunity,Envelope; Hiv-1; Host Factors; Immune Escape; Long-Term Non Progressor; Long-Term Survivor; Nef; Recombination; Sequencing; Superinfection; Transmission; Viral Diversity; Viral Evolution,"A certain number of patients, very few, infected with HIV are able to control the virus with no anti-HIV medication. This group of rare patients has been identified as «long term non-progressors» and may have special mechanisms that enables them to control the virus on their own. Learning more about such mechanisms may be very important to help designing vaccines and/or new therapies or prevention strategies for HIV. We will be recruiting HIV-1 infected subjects who are long term non-progressors and patients who have a normal disease progression, to study how various factors such as the type of virus they are infected with, their immune system, or their cells, help them to control the infection. In addition, we want to determine the long-term clinical and psychological natural history of the infection for such patients and evaluate whether superinfection may alter their disease progression.",5 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=170855&lang=en
170857,Regulation of B lymphocyte activation and migration during the germinal center response,Marshall  Aaron J,"Marshall, Aaron J",University of Manitoba,Manitoba,Canada,200809,669630.0,Operating Grant,Operating Grants,Biomedical,Infection and Immunity,Antibody; Cell Migration; Germinal Centre; Lymphocyte; Mouse Genetic Models; Signal Transduction,"The immune system is critical to human health.  In order to develop vaccines and treatments for diseases where the immune system malfunctions (such as immunodeficiency, autoimmunity, allergy and asthma), we need to better understand the fundamental mechanisms governing immune responses.  Our research deals with the arm of the immune system responsible for producing antibodies, which are specialized proteins that bind to microorganisms (the antigen) and target them for destruction by the immune system.  Besides this protective role, antibodies can have destructive pathogenic roles, for example anti-DNA antibodies in Lupus, and allergen-binding IgE antibodies in atopic disease.  Antibodies are secreted into the blood and mucosal surface by cells called B lymphocytes.  B lymphocytes are controlled by receptor proteins on their cell surface which allow them to sense the presence of antigens, tissue damage and other activated cells.  These receptors also provide signals telling the cells where to go within the body during an immune response.  Cell surface receptors deliver signals to the interior of the cell through another set of proteins known as signal transduction proteins.   Our research aims to define the specific molecular signaling pathways that regulate the activities of B lymphocytes during normal and abnormal immune responses.  In this grant proposal we will investigate the roles of molecules in the PI 3-kinase signaling pathway in controlling selection of B cells producing protective antibodies or allergen-binding IgE antibodies.",5 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=170857&lang=en
170866,Mechanisms of alternative splicing,Chabot  Benoit,"Chabot, Benoit",Universit&eacute; de Sherbrooke,Qu&eacute;bec,Canada,200809,784730.0,Operating Grant,Operating Grants,Biomedical,Genetics,Alternative Splicing; Apoptosis; Cancer; Hnrnp; Rna Maturation; Signal Transduction,"It takes 15 000 genes to make a fly and 10 000 more genes to make a human. The number of genes is therefore not a good predictor of the complexity of an organism. How is the complexity of the human body generated from such a limited set of genes ? A big part of the answer lies in alternative pre-mRNA splicing. Alternative splicing occurs after a gene is transcribed into RNA. Different portions of the pre-mRNAs are combined to produce different types of mRNAs. Thus, through alternative splicing, a single gene can produce many different types of proteins with different activities. The Bcl-x gene is an excellent example of how alternative splicing can make a big difference. When the Bcl-x primary transcript is spliced in one manner, it will produce a protein that can provoke cell death. When it is spliced in a slightly different way, the protein will play a protective role and will protect against cell death. Cancer cells produce mostly the anti-death version. We wish to understand the molecular events that are responsible for this splicing choice. This knowledge may help designing more efficient treatments and may lead to novel tools to combat cancer.  

We are proposing to pursue our in-depth characterization of the RNA sequences and proteins involved in the control of Bcl-x splicing. We have already identified several sequence elements and factors that affect splicing decisions on the Bcl-x pre-mRNA. One sequence is involved in the response to a drug that induces the death of cancer cells and shifts splicing to favor the production of the death-inducing version of Bcl-x. Our studies will improve our understanding of alternative splicing, and is designed to discover the switches that control the production of a protein involved in the resistance of cancer cells to chemotherapy.",5 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=170866&lang=en
170868,Mechanisms by which Diabetes Mellitus promotes the development and progression of atherosclerosis,Werstuck  Geoffrey H,"Werstuck, Geoffrey H",McMaster University,Ontario,Canada,200809,388746.0,Operating Grant,Operating Grants,Biomedical,"Nutrition, Metabolism and Diabetes",Atherosclerosis; Diabetes Mellitus; Endoplasmic Reticulum Stress; Glutamine:Fructose-6 Phosphate Amidotransferase; Mouse Models,"Over 75% of people with diabetes will die prematurely of heart attack or stroke.  The goal of our research is to; i) determine why, and ii) to find ways to prevent this from happening.  We have identified a novel pathway within the cells of the body. This pathway is activated by high levels of sugar in the blood (hyperglycemia) and can result in damage to the cells of the blood vessel walls. We are currently testing the importance of this pathway and identifying specific points within the pathway that we can target with drugs to block disease progression. These studies are important because our increased understanding of these disease processes will permit a rational approach to the development of treatments and prevention strategies.",3 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=170868&lang=en
170875,Molecular cell biology of herpesvirus egress,Banfield  Bruce W,"Banfield, Bruce W","Queen's University (Kingston, Ontario)",Ontario,Canada,200809,576015.0,Operating Grant,Operating Grants,Biomedical,Infection and Immunity,Herpesvirus Infections; Protein-Protein Interactions; Regulation Of Map Kinase Activity; Vesicular Trafficking; Virus Maturation And Egress; Virus-Host Interactions,"Herpesviruses are a large family of pathogens that infect and cause disease in diverse animals ranging from oysters to elephants. My laboratory studies the alphaherpesvirus subgroup that includes the human pathogens herpes simplex virus types 1 and 2 and varicella-zoster virus, the causative agent of chicken pox and shingles. Infections with these viruses are highly prevalent in Canadians, with upward of 30% of adults infected with herpes simplex virus type 1, for example. All viruses rely on components provided by host cells for the successful execution of their replication programs. It follows that there is a requirement for virus molecules to establish intimate relationships with cellular molecules. By identifying and understanding the mechanics of these critical virus-host cell interactions we hope to develop ways to disrupt these interactions and thereby create new methodologies for the treatment of herpes disease. We have demonstrated that the alphaherpesvirus structural protein Us2 binds to a cellular protein called ERK. Our experiments suggest that the interaction between Us2 and ERK promotes the release of infectious virus from cells.  ERK is a very important cellular signaling molecule that participates in the regulation of cell growth, division and identity. It turns out that defects in the ERK signaling pathway are responsible for upwards of 30% of human cancers. Thus, there is a great deal of interest in understanding how ERK is regulated. We know that Us2 inhibits some ERK activities and stimulates others. What we don't yet understand is how Us2 interacts with ERK. Many cellular proteins have been identified that bind to ERK, but none of them look like Us2, so we think Us2 uses a novel mechanism for binding to ERK and regulating ERK activity. This grant application focuses on determining the molecular basis for the regulation of ERK activity by Us2 and how the ERK/Us2 interaction influences virus infection.",5 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=170875&lang=en
170876,Molecular mechanisms underlying the onset and resolution of macrophage activation in the nervous system: implications for neural injury and repair,David  Samuel,"David, Samuel",Research Institute of the McGill University Health Centre,Qu&eacute;bec,Canada,200809,762932.0,Operating Grant,Operating Grants,Biomedical,"Neurosciences, Mental Health and Addiction",Cns Injury; Demyelination; Macrophage Activation; Neural Repair; Neuroinflammation; Peripheral Nerve Injury,"Injury to the central nervous system (CNS), which includes the brain and spinal cord results in permanent functional loss of because of the inability of the CNS nerve cells to regenerate. CNS injuries trigger a robust inflammatory response at the site of injury but a weak and delayed response away from the lesion.  This immune response involves a cell called the macrophage that serves to remove damaged cells.  However, macrophages in the injured CNS can be toxic, kill cells, and cause additional tissue damage and functional loss.  Macrophages on the other hand also have beneficial effects for tissue repair.  Preventing the toxic effects of these macrophages while preserving their beneficial effects will therefore aid recovery.  In regions away for the lesion, the macrophage response is very poor; as a result damaged nerve fibers and their covering sheath called myelin are removed very slowly.  The slow removal of myelin has important consequences for subsequent nerve regeneration because myelin contains molecules that prevent growth of damaged nerve fibers.  In addition, it is important to understand how inflammation is terminated.  This proposal is designed to identify molecules that control these macrophage responses.  These studies will have important implications for the development of treatments for spinal cord injury and other neurological conditions in which inflammation occurs such as stroke and brain trauma.",5 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=170876&lang=en
170885,Brain and retinal light sensitivity in seasonal affective disorder,Carrier  Julie,"Carrier, Julie; Hebert, Marc",CIUSSS du Nord-de-l'Ile-de Montr&eacute;al - H&ocirc;pital Sacr&eacute; Coeur,Qu&eacute;bec,Canada,200809,288351.0,Operating Grant,Operating Grants,Clinical,"Neurosciences, Mental Health and Addiction",Circadian Rhythms; Depression; Electroretinogram; Functionnal Brain Imaging; Light Exposure; Seasonal Affective Disorder,"Seasonal affective disorder (SAD) is a condition characterized by cyclic fall and winter depression followed by spring and summer remission. Although the origin of the disorder is not known, the consensus is that SAD patients are more susceptible to the seasonal decrease in light exposure and that light therapy is the treatment of choice for these patients. However, both the susceptibility to light changes and the relationship between light and mood regulation remain unclear. Members of our group showed that SAD patients' retina is less sensitive to light. Given that light is transmitted by the retina to the brain, we do not yet know whether retinal changes contribute to the disorder via an impact on brain response to light. Recently, it was shown that is it possible to measure brain response to light in humans using functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI).  The main goal of this three-year research program is to assess brain and retinal sensitivity to light in SAD patients. In this study, 32 patients with SAD and 32 matched healthy participants will be evaluated in both winter and summer in order to assess seasonal variation in both retinal and brain sensitivity to light. This study will contribute to a better understanding of the underlying mechanisms of SAD, which could lead to better treatment of the disorder as light therapy is effective in about 60% of the patients, and open new research avenues on other psychiatric desorders.",3 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=170885&lang=en
170891,Opioids modify glial activity in models of chronic pain and opioid  tolerant states,Cahill  Catherine M,"Cahill, Catherine M","Queen's University (Kingston, Ontario)",Ontario,Canada,200810,54351.0,CIHR/RxD - Biology of Pain -Young Investigators Grant,Operating Grants,Biomedical,Aging,G Protein Coupled Receptors; Neuronal-Glial Communications; Neuropathic Pain; Opioid Tolerance; Toll Like Receptor Protein; Ultralow Dose Opioid Antagonists,"Canadian Pain Society approximates the total cost of chronic 
pain to the Canadian economy to be $12.5 billion per year and it 
is estimated that nearly 1 in 3 Canadians suffers from chronic 
pain, making it the most common form of chronic illness in 
Canadians under the age of 60. One broad category of chronic 
pain that is particularly problematic is neuropathic (NP) pain.  
Treatment of NP pain is particularly challenging, as it is typically 
refractory to conventional (opioids) and non-traditional (anti-
depressants and anti-epileptics) analgesics, or their use is 
limited by intolerable side effects.  Consequently, this factor has 
led to profound interest in investigating the neural basis of NP 
pain.  Over the past decade, one proposed mechanism 
underlying NP pain is glial-induced modulation of synaptic 
activity in pain transmitting neurons.  Glia have traditionally be 
regarded as structural supports for neurons and important for 
maintaining CNS homeostasis. However, glia have key roles in 
modulating neuronal communication.  Since this discovery, 
research has linked reactive glia to various chronic pain 
conditions including NP pain.  We have evidence that opioid 
analgesics increase glial activation and this activity subsequently 
leads to opioid tolerant states.  Preliminary data suggest that 
ultralow  dose opioid antagonists attenuate the development of 
opioid analgesics but also suppress glial activation as evidenced 
by changes in cell morphology.",2 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=170891&lang=en
170902,Regulation of the actin cytoskeleton by the cell adhesion molecule Echinoid.,Nilson  Laura A,"Nilson, Laura A",McGill University,Qu&eacute;bec,Canada,200809,526160.0,Operating Grant,Operating Grants,Biomedical,Genetics,Actin Cytoskeleton; Cell Adhesion; Cell-Cell Interactions; Drosophila Genetics; Echinoid; Planar Cell Polarity,"Our bodies contain a wide range of cell types that are specialized for carrying out particular functions.  These cells adopt a variety of distinctive shapes, and are often organized into discrete tissues that in turn form our various organs.  How these tissues acquire and maintain their appropriate architecture is a fundamental question in basic research, and understanding the mechanisms that control these processes is of great importance to our understanding of diseases, such as cancer, that are associated with a loss of normal tissue organization.  

We are exploring this question using Drosophila as a simple model system.  Specifically, we are studying the function of the Echinoid (Ed) protein, a molecule found on the cell surface.  We have shown previously that Ed plays a role in interactions between cells; when a cell with Ed on its surface touches a cell without Ed, the cells respond by changing their shape and modifying their internal cytoskeleton at the point of contact, apparently minimizing their contact.  We propose that Ed acts as a molecular sensor to help cells assess their neighbors, and will study how the act of sensing that a neighboring cell is ""different"" affects the internal machinery of the cell.  Knowledge of how shape and organization are regulated in normal tissue will contribute to our understanding of how disruption of these processes leads to disease.",5 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=170902&lang=en
170905,Characterization of effector kinases for the Rho family small GTPases in a Drosophila model of wound healing,Harden  Nicholas,"Harden, Nicholas","Simon Fraser University (Burnaby, B.C.)",British Columbia,Canada,200809,695645.0,Operating Grant,Operating Grants,Biomedical,Genetics,Diverse Malignancies And Birth Defects; Drosophila Developmental Genetics; Nonreceptor  Tyrosine Kinase Ack; Serine/Threonine Kinase Pak; Signal Transduction By Rho Family Small Gtpases; Wound Healing,"During the development of embryos, there is a need to close holes in sheets of cells called epithelia. Failure of such closure events can lead to birth defects such as spina bifida and cleft lip and palate. Developmental epithelial closure is very similar to the healing of an induced wound, and the two processes use the same cellular machinery. Indeed, developmental epithelial closures can be considered as wound healing events. We have been studying genes involved in a developmental wound healing event in the fruitfy Drosophila. We use this organism due to the advanced genetic tools available and the ease with which this wound healing event can be observed. We know that this work is relevant to human wound healing, as much of the cellular machinery has already been characterized, and is the same in humans and fruitflies. We are asking two important questions with regard to the Drosophila wound healing process: how is cell shape change coordinated during wound closure and how do the epithelial sheets from opposite sides of the wound adhere to each other to seal the wound? There are a number of potential medical benefits from this research. It will increase our understanding of the cellular events behind the closure of epithelial sheets both during development and in the healing of induced wounds. This work will also give important insight into the regulation of the movement, shape and ""stickiness"" of epithelial cells, all properties that when misregulated can contribute to the formation of tumors by epithelial cells.",5 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=170905&lang=en
170910,Post-transcriptional regulation of FGF-2; role of antisense gene expression,Murphy  Paul R,"Murphy, Paul R",Dalhousie University (Nova Scotia),Nova Scotia,Canada,200809,351294.0,Operating Grant,Operating Grants,Biomedical,"Nutrition, Metabolism and Diabetes",Antisense Rna; Cancer; Gene Expression; Growth Factors; Rna Editiing; Sirna,"Fibroblast growth factor (FGF) is a potent signaling molecule which promotes the growth of many kinds of cells. The expression of FGF is under tight regulatory control, and loss of this regulation can result in stimulation of cancer cell proliferation. The normal regulation of FGF appears to involve a novel ""antisense"" RNA which has the ability to silence FGF expression by an unknown mechanism. We have found that the expression of the antisense product can suppress FGF levels and inhibit tumor development and recurrence after surgical treatment. The present research is directed toward defining the role of this antisense RNA in the function of both normal and cancerous cells.",3 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=170910&lang=en
170914,LSP1 signaling mechanisms in chemokine-induced neutrophil emigration,Liu  Lixin,"Liu, Lixin",University of Saskatchewan,Saskatchewan,Canada,200809,300000.0,CIHR New Investigator,Salary Programs,Biomedical,Infection and Immunity,Cellular Interactions; Inflammation; Intravital Microscopy; Microvasculature; Neutrophils; Recruitment,"When there is an infection or injury in the body, neutrophils, the most abundant white blood cells, will move from blood, across the blood vessel wall and toward the site of infection or injury. Normally, neutrophils kill bacteria. But in diseases such as sepsis, hemorrhage, myocardial infarction, or stroke, they damage or even kill our own cells. This harmful situation should be prevented.

LSP1 (leukocyte-specific protein 1) is a protein inside white blood cells, including neutrophils. We recently found that LSP1 is also present in the blood vessel wall (endothelium) and that it controls neutrophil movement out of the blood vessel. We will use a sophisticated microscope to watch and measure this movement in mice.  We will use mice bred specifically to lack LSP1, and compare them with normal mice with LSP1. We will use chemicals (called chemokines) to examine if the LSP1 in endothelium or in neutrophils is important in neutrophil movement within and across the vessel wall, and in the tissue. We will check how fast and how far the neutrophils move, how important the LSP1 in neutrophils and in endothelium is in the process, and if those chemokines use or bypass LSP1 in endothelium. We have the experience and skills of using the specialized microscope to watch directly the movement of neutrophils within the vessel wall and in the tissues. We are probably unique in Canada because we can use the microscope with special new techniques for doing the research and with the special mice having no LSP1 (which we can share with other scientists).

Many inflammatory diseases are very difficult to treat.  Migration out of the blood vessel is the most important step for neutrophils to move to the site of infection or injury.  We focus on this step and will reveal the detailed mechanisms of how LSP1 works in endothelium and in neutrophils.  Our research will provide clues to design and develop better drugs in the management of various vascular and inflammatory diseases.",5 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=170914&lang=en
170920,Memory TH2 cell responses during helminth infection,Zaph  Colby,"Zaph, Colby",University of British Columbia,British Columbia,Canada,200809,300000.0,CIHR New Investigator,Salary Programs,Biomedical,Infection and Immunity,Cd4 T Cells; Gastrointestinal; Gut Homing; Helminth Infection; Immunological Memory; Retinoic Acid,"An estimated two billion people worldwide are infected with soil-transmitted helminth parasitic worms. Field and experimental studies have shown that immunity in infected individuals is associated with expression of T helper type 2 (TH2) cytokines, the same family of messenger proteins that are over-expressed in asthma, allergies and some forms of inflammatory bowel disease. Although there is strong evidence that there is resistance to re-infection, it is unclear how this 'immunological memory' develops nor how it works. The goals of this proposal are to understand how the immune system remembers helminth parasites and to employ this knowledge to design successful anti-helminth vaccines. At the same time, this information will be extremely useful in the development of new therapies that treat diseases caused by dysregulated TH2 cells. Thus, the results of these studies will provide insights into the nature and function of memory TH2 cells and will be broadly applicable towards optimizing anti-parasite immunity as well as limiting inflammatory diseases caused by TH2 cells.",5 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=170920&lang=en
170924,Long-term outcome of antidepressant treatment in a general population sample,Colman  Ian R,"Colman, Ian R",University of Alberta,Alberta,Canada,200809,96315.0,Operating Grant,Operating Grants,Health systems / services,"Neurosciences, Mental Health and Addiction",Antidepressants; Depression; Follow-Up Studies; Longitudinal Data Analysis; Propensity Scores,"In spite of the frequency and severity of depression, controversy remains over the appropriate use of antidepressants as treatment. Part of the confusion stems from the fact that randomized controlled trials that test the efficacy of antidepressants often have a very short duration and have rigid criteria that exclude many individuals with common features of depression. Consequently, little is known about the long-term effectiveness of antidepressant treatment among depressed people in the general population. This project will use data from an ongoing study run by Statistics Canada that has followed a group of 17,276 Canadians since 1994. The sample for this study will include 573 individuals who were depressed in 1998/99. Those who were using antidepressants will be compared to those who were not with regards to their experience of depression between 2000/01 and 2006/07. The analysis will account for several influential factors that affect the likelihood of being treated with antidepressants and the prognosis of depression. Given recent controversy over the efficacy of antidepressant medications in the treatment of depression, the results of this study could make a significant contribution towards providing evidence to guide policy-makers and clinicians in decisions regarding best care for individuals with depression.",2 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=170924&lang=en
170932,Phosphatidylcholine metabolism and function,Vance  Dennis E,"Vance, Dennis E",University of Alberta,Alberta,Canada,200809,1123529.0,Operating Grant,Operating Grants,Biomedical,"Nutrition, Metabolism and Diabetes",Bone Metabolism; Choline Kinase; Ctp:Phosphocholine Cytidylyltransferase; Muscular Dystrophy; Phosphatidylethanolamine N-Methyltransferase; Steatohepatitis,"Lay Abstract

Phosphatidylcholine (PC) is the major lipid found in the membranes of mammalian cells. All cells with a nucleus must make PC or the cell will die. Hence, PC is required for life. PC is also the substance that keeps our lungs from collapsing when we breathe out air. PC is required for the formation of lipoproteins (carry cholesterol and fat). We propose to continue our work on PC that has been supported by MRC/CIHR continuously for 34 years. Our recent work has focused on 3 mouse models that have genetic defects in PC biosynthesis. Mice that lack one form of an enzyme called choline kinase (CK) develop muscular dystrophy in their hind legs and have defective bone formation in the front legs. We plan to investigate the mechanisms by which the lack of CK leads to these diseases. Mice that lack another enzyme called CT alpha develop liver disease. We propose studies to determine the mechanism leading to this disease. Lack of a third enzyme, PEMT, leads also to liver disease when the mice are fed a choline-deficient diet. We found that this was due to a decrease in the amount of PC relative to another membrane lipid, PE. We shall investigate to see if this is also true for humans with a liver disease called non-alcoholic steatohepatitis (NASH). We shall obtain the detailed structure of PEMT as a prelude to determination of a specific inhibitor. At the end of the granting period we expect that the information provided will be helpful in development of the treatment for these diseases in humans.",5 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=170932&lang=en
170934,Molecular dynamics of the cell-surface proteome in primary prostate cancer cells: Towards a community resource for therapeutic intervention and biomarker discovery,Kislinger  Thomas,"Kislinger, Thomas; Medin, Jeffrey A",University Health Network (Toronto),Ontario,Canada,200809,383699.0,Operating Grant,Operating Grants,Biomedical,Cancer Research,Bioinformatics; Biomarker; Cell-Surface Markers; Chemotherapy; Prostate Cancer; Proteomics,"Prostate cancer is the most common cancer among North American men and is in general treated by surgery, radiation therapy or chemotherapy. Cell-surface membrane proteins comprise more than half of the known drug targets. Proteomics is the functional, large-scale study of the sets of proteins expressed in a biological entity. It can provide an unbiased read-out of a pathophysiological state and provide a systems-wide insight into specific diseases. Here, we will apply a novel proteomics technology to gain insights into the expression of cell-surface membrane proteins in primary human prostate cancer cells and compare these to healthy controls. We will further determine the changes in protein expression in these prostate cancer cells in response to several common therapeutic treatment strategies. We will then pragmatically mine these data to generate a limited number of novel targets used as diagnostic biomarkers, for tumor imaging or targeted therapies. Knowledge of protein expression on the cell-surface of primary human prostate cancer cells will provide targets for biomarker discovery and function as a springboard for the development of novel combinatorial treatment strategies for prostate cancer. To facilitate streamlined data analysis, we will develop an in-house database management system with web-based access for maximum impact and sharing of the data with the greater scientific community.",3 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=170934&lang=en
170936,Cardiovascular pharmacology of the B1 and B2 receptors for kinins,Marceau  Fran&ccedil;ois,"Marceau, François",Universit&eacute; Laval,Qu&eacute;bec,Canada,200809,663985.0,Operating Grant,Operating Grants,Biomedical,Circulatory and Respiratory Health,Analytical Biochemistry; Bradykinin Receptors; Cardiovascular Pharmacology; Radioligand Studies; Vascular Permeability,"The kinins are hormone-like substances generated from blood, but also potentially from the cells that constitute the blood vessels. Two types of receptors are activated by kinins: the B2 receptors are preformed and widely distributed. The B1 receptors are not present in healthy tissues, but ther expression is completely induced under inflammatory or tissue injury conditions. Angiotensin converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitors are a widely used class of drugs used for hypertension and other cardiovascular/renal ailments that inteact with kinins, because ACE is a prominent kinin-destroying enzyme in vivo. Thus, a part of the therapeutic and/or side effects of ACE inhibitors may derive from an increased kinin concentration in tissues, vascular responses such as vasodilation and increased permeability and adaptative changes in the population of kinin receptors receptors.  Objective of the project: (1) To verify whether a particular blood vessel cell type, the endothelial cell, can produce kinin precursors and process them, thus leading to the autostimulation of cell functions under ACE blockade. (2) To verify the relative importance of kinin inactivation mechanisms in human endothelial cells (ACE being one of them). (3) To establish in endothelial cell culture and in live animals (rabbits) how a widely used anti-hypertensive drug class, the ACE inhibitors, or inflammation change the kinin receptor populations (increase in the B1 type, decrease in B2 receptors). This may be related to a rare but dangerous side effect of ACE inhibitors, angioedema, because there are theoretical reasons to believe that it is linked to B1 receptor expression.  Significance: The role of the B1 receptors has only been rarely addressed in the analysis of the actions of ACE inhibitors. The applicants have developed over the years many experimental approaches related to the kinin receptors an exploit an analytical platform (immunoreactive kinin determination) unique in the world.",5 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=170936&lang=en
170939,Understanding the activation and the roles of the IKK complex-NF-kappaB signaling cascade in the inflammatory and hypertrophic actions of Angiotensin II in vitro and in vivo,Servant  Marc,"Servant, Marc",Universit&eacute; de Montr&eacute;al,Qu&eacute;bec,Canada,200809,594105.0,Operating Grant,Operating Grants,Biomedical,Circulatory and Respiratory Health,Angiotensin Ii; Atherosclerosis; Chromatin; Hypertension; Kinases; Signal Transduction,"Cardiovascular disease (CVD), including heart disease, stroke and peripheral vascular disease, is the leading cause of death in Canada and in Western society. When death is not the end point, CVD jeopardized the quality of life. CVD is also the leading cause of hospital admissions and despite progress in its prevention, detection, and treatment, which exact an enormous toll in Canada (billions of dollar each year), it will still kill thousand of Canadian this year. Several risk factors for coronary artery disease (CAD) have been well documented including gender, age, hyperlipidemia, hypertension, smoking, diabetes, family history, physical inactivity, overweight and excessive alcohol. However these factors explain only part of attributable CVD, and other factors must be involved. Indeed, a growing body of evidence supports the concept that local and systemic chronic inflammation may play a role in the initiation and progression of atherosclerosis and its complication (angina crisis, stroke and sudden death). In the arteries, atherosclerosis is characterized by a recruitment of cells of the immune system into the vessel wall, an accumulation of circulating cholesterol followed by an increase in the number of vascular muscle cells, the major component of the vascular system. These processes lead ultimately to plaque formation, which diminish blood flow and ultimately leads to myocardial infarction or stroke. The underlying cause of this chronic inflammation and how its specifically relates to CAD is at the moment unknown. Evidence suggests however that a hormone, angiotensin II (Ang II) known to increase the blood pressure, might be an important contributor to this chronic inflammation of the vessel wall leading to atherosclerosis. Thus, the principal objective of my research proposal is to characterize which molecular signals are induced by Ang II and important for its inflammatory effect. Results generated by this project will help to discover new therapeutic target",5 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=170939&lang=en
170940,Neuroprotective Effect of Mood Stabilizers: the Role of the Major Brain Antioxidant Glutathione,Wang  Jun-Feng,"Wang, Jun-Feng",University of British Columbia,British Columbia,Canada,200809,441104.0,Operating Grant,Operating Grants,Biomedical,"Neurosciences, Mental Health and Addiction",Bipolar Disorder; Glutathione; Mitochondrial Dysfunction; Mood Stabilizer; Neuroprotection; Oxidative Damage,"Bipolar disorder is a serious psychiatric illness in which subjects experience severe recurrent episodes of mania and depression, and a high rate of psychosocial disability. Lithium and valproate are the most commonly used mood stabilizing drugs in treatment of bipolar disorder, and have been found to protect brain cells from damage. We recently found that these two drugs specifically inhibit oxidative damage to brain cells. We also found that lithium and valproate regulate the essential brain antioxidant glutathione and functionally related enzyme glutathione s-transferase. Both glutathione and glutathione s-transferase play important roles against oxidative damage to cells. We will further determine if lithium and valproate regulate glutathione and glutathione s-transferase in brain regions specifically related to mood using animal models for mania and depression. The results of these studies will further clarify the mechanism of action of mood stabilizing drugs and may lead to the identification of new treatments for bipolar disorder.",4 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=170940&lang=en
170949,Role of Oxygen as a Regulator of Tumour Cell Plasticity and Metastatic Potential,Postovit  Lynne-Marie,"Postovit, Lynne-Marie",Western University (Ontario),Ontario,Canada,200809,300000.0,CIHR New Investigator,Salary Programs,Biomedical,Cancer Research,Breast Cancer; Hypoxia; Melanoma; Metastasis; Nodal; Stem Cell,"Rapidly growing tumours contain many areas of low oxygen (hypoxia), and the presence of these hypoxic regions is associated with cancer metastasis and a poor clinical outcome.  In a manner similar to stem cells, sub-populations of aggressive cancer cells express embryo-associated proteins, such as Nodal, that enable them to grow forever (self-renew).  Recent studies have revealed that low oxygen levels allow stem cells to grow forever (self renew).   We propose that low oxygen levels similarly allow cancer cells to grow forever and metastasize. As such, the effects of hypoxia on the expression of stem cell-associated genes (with an emphasis on Nodal) as well as the contribution of these factors to tumour progression and metastasis will be investigated.  It is our hope that this research will uncover novel targets for the treatment and prevention of cancer progression and metastasis.",5 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=170949&lang=en
170950,Investigation of meiotic defects in infertile men undergoing assisted reproductive technologies,Ma  Sai,"Ma, Sai",University of British Columbia,British Columbia,Canada,200809,342369.0,Operating Grant,Operating Grants,Clinical,"Human Development, Child and Youth Health",Male Infertility; Meiotic Defects In Infertile Men; Meiotic Recombination; Meiotic Sex Chromsome Inactivation; Sperm Aneuploidy; Synaptic Errors/Asynapsed Autosomal Chromosomes,"It is estimated that 2% of men are infertile due to severe defects in sperm production.  In the majority of these cases, the cause of infertility remains unknown.  
       During spermatogenesis, cells must undergo a specialized type of cell division known as meiosis.  Recent studies have shown that errors in this meiotic division are more prevalent in infertile men and may play an important role in idiopathic male infertility.  We recently provided evidence that meiotic errors in infertile men may also be associated with the production of aneuploid sperm, that is, sperm containing either extra or missing chromosomes.  Our prelimineary results suggest that meiotic errors may lead to arrest in some cells, leading to infertility, while other cells may proceed through meiosis and produce aneuploid sperm.
       We are using recently developed techniques to further charaterize the meiotic defects that lead to the production of aneuploid sperm and male infertility.  Such information could eventually aid in risk assessment for men undergoing assisted reproductive technologies (ART).  Aneuploidy remains the most frequent cause of miscarriage, and, among liveborns, it is the most common genetic cause of congenital malformations.  The results of this study will also provide further direction in the search for gene mutations that contribute to male-factor infertility.",3 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=170950&lang=en
170951,Nonmotor and imaging features of tardive parkinsonism in chronic schizophrenia,Blanchet  Pierre J,"Blanchet, Pierre J",Centre hospitalier de l'Universit&eacute; de Montr&eacute;al (CHUM),Qu&eacute;bec,Canada,200809,594213.0,Operating Grant,Operating Grants,Clinical,"Neurosciences, Mental Health and Addiction",Antipsychotic Drugs; Parkinsonism; Pet Scanning; Polysomnography; Schizophrenia,"Drug-induced parkinsonism, featuring resting tremor, motor slowing, and body stiffness, remains an unacceptable and frequent complication in about one third of patients treated for schizophrenia with antipsychotic drugs. It typically occurs shortly after drug initiation, often recovering following drug readjustment or withdrawal. However, other individuals with chronic schizophrenia display delayed-onset, persistent parkinsonism, and are thought to suffer from Parkinson's disease. The body of data supporting this hypothesis is thin at present. Since the mechanisms underlying parkinsonism in chronic schizophrenia have not been thoroughly investigated, the condition is not well treated and affects quality of life. In this proposal, clinical markers targeting non-motor aspects of parkinsonism (changes in smell, pain threshold, and sleep architecture), as well as chemical brain scanning markers, will be assessed in patients treated for chronic schizophrenia over 50 years of age, to determine whether those with parkinsonism really suffer from Parkinson's disease. This project may well challenge our concepts about the cause of parkinsonism in chronic schizophrenia. The original data generated may provide ground work to improve treatment strategies.",5 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=170951&lang=en
170955,Tailored cognitive-behaviour therapy for individuals with severe mental illness in supported employment programs - effects on work outcomes and related variables.,Lecomte  Tania,"Lecomte, Tania; Corbière, Marc",Universit&eacute; de Montr&eacute;al,Qu&eacute;bec,Canada,200809,285603.0,Operating Grant,Operating Grants,Health systems / services,"Neurosciences, Mental Health and Addiction",Cognitive Behaviour Therapy; Schizophrenia; Severe Mental Illness; Supported Employment Program; Vocational,"More than 80% of individuals with a severe mental illness such as schizophrenia wish to work in regular competitive jobs. Even the best vocational programs --such as those following the supported employment model-- only find employment for approximately 50% of participants, with many losing their jobs after a few months. Of the reasons found to explain these results, inappropriate expectancies, poor coping strategies as well as erroneous beliefs about the workplace or their own work abilities are often mentioned. The current proposal wishes to offer a tailored group intervention to 50 individuals with severe mental illness engaged in a supported employment program and compare their work outcomes over one year to those of 50 other participants enrolled in the same vocational program but not receiving the group intervention. The group intervention will specifically target expectancies, beliefs and coping strategies related to work. The study will also measure the contribution of other factors that can impede successful work integration, such as financial disincentives, symptoms, the presence of other mental disorders or of cognitive deficits and social interaction deficits. Such an intervention could potentially improve work integration of individuals with severe mental illness at a fairly low cost.",3 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=170955&lang=en
170956,Role of dendritic cell in oral tolerance and food allergy,Yang  Pingchang,"Yang, Pingchang",McMaster University,Ontario,Canada,200809,600744.0,Operating Grant,Operating Grants,Biomedical,Infection and Immunity,Food Allergy; Intestine,"As many as 4~8% populations have IgE-mediated hypersensitivity to food antigen. The prevalence of food allergy and related disorders increased rapidly across the world in last few decades. Research in the area of food allergy has advanced rapidly in recent years; however, the mechanism of food allergy remains unclear. Symptoms of food allergy range from slight abdominal discomfort to life-threatening anaphylactic shock reactions; peanut allergy usually (about 80%) accounts for severe or fatal anaphylactic reactions; furthermore, peanut allergy is usually lifelong. Food allergic reaction involves not only the intestinal tract, but other body systems as well, such as the skin, the airway and the cardiovascular system. Food allergic disorders are common throughout the world. It affects both males and females of all ages, races and social classes. It has emerged as a major health problem in the world. In fact, we currently do not have any satisfactory therapeutic remedies for the treatment of food allergy. This research project aims to elucidate: I, to investigate the role of epithelial cell in the generation of tolerogenic dendritic cell in the intestine. II, to examine the role of tolerogenic dendritic cell in the development of Tregs. III, to elucidate the role of gut microbial products in perturbing the generation/function of tolerogenic dendritic cell and initiation of food allergy and IV, to develop dendritic cell-based vaccines as a therapeutic strategy for food allergy. The outcome of this research project will (i) further elucidate the role of intestinal tolerogenic dendritic cell in the antigen-specific oral tolerance and (ii) has a potential to contribute to the treatment of food allergy as well as other types of allergic diseases.",5 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=170956&lang=en
170958,Equity in pharmacare: the effects of ethnicity and policy in British Columbia,Morgan  Steven G,"Morgan, Steven G",University of British Columbia,British Columbia,Canada,200809,165766.0,Operating Grant,Operating Grants,Health systems / services,Health Services and Policy Research,Access To Care; Administrative Data Analysis; Canadian Community Health Survey; Equity; Ethnicity; Prescription Drugs,"Our goal is to measure differences in the use of prescription drugs across ethnic groups in British Columbia. We will also determine whether government communications about prescription drug benefits targeted at specific ethnic populations reduced ethnic variations in medicine use in BC.

The use and cost of prescription drugs has risen quickly in recent years. At the same time, Canada's ethnocultural makeup has changed significantly. The current proportion of the Canadian population that is foreign-born is the highest it has been in 75 years and is among the highest such proportions in western countries. Statistics Canada reports trends toward greater diversity of ethnic backgrounds in Canada and greater numbers of Chinese and South Asian Canadians in particular.

Given the increase use of medicines and changing makeup of our population, surprisingly little is known about ethnic variations in the use of prescription medicines in Canada. Our previous CIHR-funded research suggests that this lack of information could be a serious problem. We are therefore going to use a unique database from British Columbia to determine the extent of ethnic variations in the use of prescription drugs in BC during the period of 1996 to 2007.

Research from this project will be communicated to policy makers, other researchers, and directly to communities through presentations and summaries in a variety of languages.",2 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=170958&lang=en
170960,The influence of social networks on knowledge translation in long term care settings,Sales  Anne E,"Sales, Anne E",University of Alberta,Alberta,Canada,200809,60231.0,Operating Grant,Operating Grants,Health systems / services,Health Services and Policy Research,Audit With Feedback; Health Care Workforce; Knowledge Translation; Long Term Care; Quality Of Care; Social Networks,"Humans are social, and our social interactions have a strong effect on our behavior and how we respond to change.  Over the last hundred years, ways of drawing and analyzing social networks have been developed.  Along with the development of better and easier ways to understand human social networks, we have also developed a better understanding over the last three decades of how hard it can be to help people change behavior.  We are beginning to develop specific interventions, or ways to make change easier, and to understand why some interventions work in some places with some people, and not others.  This research has immediate impact on the health and wellbeing of the public in health care settings, where we would like to speed up how quickly health care providers adopt new research-based treatments.  In particular, we have done relatively little research on how to bring research-based practice into long term or continuing care facilities, settings where mostly frail older people receive ongoing care, such as nursing homes.

In this project, we will use relatively new methods of studying social networks among care providers in nursing homes, which we will add to an existing project.  In the existing project, we are providing feedback reports based on data that are already being collected routinely on all residents.  Feedback reports are being distributed every month, and we will ask additional questions and observe how people react when they get the feedback reports.  We would like to understand how social networks--who talks to whom, who goes to another person to get advice--influence whether or not the feedback reports are used.  The information from this project will be of great value in future research to develop efficient and effective interventions to promote practice based on research, and it will also help us understand how and why interventions work in some settings with some people, but not with others.",1 yr 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=170960&lang=en
170961,"A Phase 1, First-in-Man Trial of Intracoronary Collagenase Therapy For Chronic Total Occlusions",Strauss  Bradley H,"Strauss, Bradley H","Sunnybrook Research Institute (Toronto, Ontario)",Ontario,Canada,200809,278676.0,Operating Grant,Operating Grants,Biomedical,Circulatory and Respiratory Health,Chronic Total Occlusions; Collagenase,"Coronary arteries that have been totally blocked for 6 weeks or longer, are called chronic total occlusions (CTO). CTO are
found in 30% of all coronary angiograms and frequently cause significant cardiac symptoms (such as chest pain and shortness of breath), and likely contribute to decreased survival. Because angioplasty success rates are low in CTO,approximately 50% or worse, patients are usually referred for more invasive bypass surgery, or treated with medications and forced to live a restricted lifestyle. The major problem for angioplasty in a CTO is to successfully advance a small guidewire through the CTO into the distal artery beyond the occlusion. This difficulty is due to very hard plaque containing densely packed collagen in the CTO and the absence of a discrete channel for the guidewire to cross the CTO.
For the past several years, we have been researching a new therapy to improve angioplasty success rates in these blocked arteries. We have shown in animal models that direct injection of an enzyme, called collagenase, into the occlusion softens the collagen in the plaque that is blocking the artery, allowing a guidewire to successfully cross the CTO, without damaging the normal layers of the blood vessel. More recently, we have developed a collagenase formulation that is suitable for human use. In this application, we propose the first human trial with collagenase in 20 patients with totally
blocked arteries (occlusion age ranges from 6 weeks to 18 months of age). Since it is a first-in-man study, we intend to gradually increase the dose of the drug with careful assessment in each patient for significant side effects (cardiac or other organs), and for effects on guidewire crossing. A total of 4 doses will be tested. We expect the highest dose will be most effective for guidewire crossing, with acceptable side effect profile. These results will be used to determine the most appropriate dose for a large- scale clinical trial.",2 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=170961&lang=en
170963,Investigating vestibulodynia subtypes from a multidimensional pain perspective,Pukall  Caroline F,"Pukall, Caroline F","Queen's University (Kingston, Ontario)",Ontario,Canada,200809,181918.0,Operating Grant,Operating Grants,Clinical,"Neurosciences, Mental Health and Addiction",Chronic Genital Pain; Laser Doppler Imaging; Psychophysics; Psychosocial Function; Vestibulodynia; Vulvodynia,"The central theme guiding our research is the investigation of the pain component of vulvodynia (i.e., chronic genital pain in women) within a multidisciplinary pain perspective. Our pain-centered approach has led to unique studies in the area of vulvodynia, including its evaluation and treatment; our approach involves a careful characterization of the pain, an examination of the effects of the pain on functioning, and an investigation of potential physical factors involved in the development and maintenance of vulvodynia. Based on these and other recent studies, various subtypes of vulvodynia have emerged. The most common subtype of vulvodynia is provoked vestibulodynia (PVD); it affects 15% of women. PVD is characterized by a severe burning pain in response to pressure at the vaginal entrance. Affected women report increased psychosocial distress and decreased quality of life as compared to non-affected women; however, very few studies have examined differences within the PVD group based on whether the condition is primary (PVD1; pain that has always existed) or secondary (PVD2; pain that developed after a period of pain-free functioning). Emerging evidence suggests that women with PVD1 and PVD2 differ on factors such as medical history, pain characteristics, and treatment response, with women with PVD1 faring worse than women with PVD2 on all studied variables. These differences have led several authors to propose that PVD1 and PVD2 result from different etiological pathways. We propose to examine PVD1 and PVD2 via an integrated pain approach involving psychosocial, psychophysical, and physiological measures in order to ultimately guide assessment and treatment options to ensure the health and well-being of women with vulvodynia.",3 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=170963&lang=en
170965,High field imaging of focal epilepsy,Ladbon Bernasconi  Neda,"Ladbon Bernasconi, Neda",Montreal Neurological Institute-Hospital,Qu&eacute;bec,Canada,200809,393809.0,Operating Grant,Operating Grants,Biomedical,"Neurosciences, Mental Health and Addiction",Epilepsy Surgery; Hippocampus; Magnetic Resonance Imaging; Morphometric Mri; Quantitative Mri; Temporal Lobe Epilepsy,"Epilepsy affects about 1% of the general population. In many of these patients, seizures cannot be controlled despite the best possible medication. The most common form of such medically intractable epilepsy is temporal lobe epilepsy (originating from a region of the brain called the temporal lobe).
Patients unresponsive to medical treatment can be helped by surgery. For surgery to work, however, it is critical to find the area of the brain, i.e. the lesion, which is responsible for the seizures. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) plays a pivotal role in the evaluation of patients who are candidates for surgery, because it makes it possible to detect lesions. However, in some patients, no lesion is seen on MRI due to their small size. Epilepsy surgery in the absence of a lesion is less successful than when a lesion is found on MRI.
The aim of this project is to develop novel MRI techniques that are more powerful to detect very subtle brain lesions. The advanced methods we propose have the potential to make the surgical treatment available to many more patients with severe epilepsy and improve our understanding of the cause of epilepsy.",4 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=170965&lang=en
170967,Characterization of the Pseudomonas aeruginosa pilus assembly complex,Burrows  Lori L,"Burrows, Lori L",McMaster University,Ontario,Canada,200809,823970.0,Operating Grant,Operating Grants,Biomedical,Infection and Immunity,Nuclear Magnetic Resonance; Protein-Protein Interactions; Pseudomonas Aeruginosa; Twitching Motility; Type Iv Pili; Xray Crystallography,"Pseudomonas aeruginosa is a serious opportunistic and hospital-acquired pathogen, infecting burn, cancer, HIV and cystic
fibrosis patients, as well as causing eye, ear and wound infections. It is rapidly becoming resistant to most antibiotics, so
alternate strategies to prevent P. aeruginosa infections are urgently needed. P. aeruginosa uses long fibres called type IV pili
(T4P) to stick to living tissue and to non-living materials such as catheters. T4P are also used for motility, allowing the
bacteria to spread from the initial site of infection. Without its T4P, P. aeruginosa is impaired in causing disease, so T4P are
great targets for new vaccines or drugs. We are investigating the functions of a group of 7 proteins that we believe work together to assemble a large hole in the cell envelope through which the pili exits to the outside of the cell. The correct assembly of this hole in the cell envelope, which has mulitple layers, is crucial to permit pili to appear on the cell surface, while maintaining cellular integrity. Our preliminary data show that removing any of any of these proteins results in either misassembly, or no assembly at all of the large outer membrane hole. We will use a number of complementary techniques ranging from microbiological, biochemical and biophysical approaches to structural biology to characterize the proposed complex, including determining each protein's atomic structure, and investigation of the specific function of each component. Together, all of this information will let us put these 3D puzzle pieces in the right order to get an accurate picture of the pilus assembly complex and identify points of vulnerability that could be exploited for development of 'pilicides'.",5 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=170967&lang=en
170976,"Role of AT1 receptor activation in progenitor cell biology, endothelial regeneration, atherosclerosis, insulin resistance, and adipogenesis",Wassmann  Sven,"Wassmann, Sven",Lady Davis Institute for Medical Research (Mtl),Qu&eacute;bec,Canada,200809,347844.0,Operating Grant,Operating Grants,Biomedical,Circulatory and Respiratory Health,Atherosclerosis; Endothelial Progenitor Cells; Endothelial Regeneration / Function; Immunohistochemistry/Facs/Cell Culture; Insulin Sensitivity; Knockout Mice / Bone Marrow Transplantations,"Atherosclerotic diseases such as heart attack and stroke are the leading cause of death in the Western world. We
investigate mechanisms that account for pathological changes in the vessel wall which are involved in the development of
atherosclerosis. We focus on the role of the so-called angiotensin AT1 receptor, a gene that has a negative effect on the
atherosclerotic process. We created mice that are prone to atherosclerosis development and lack this receptor and use this
model and other techniques to investigate the relevance of AT1 receptor activation for the function of regenerating progenitor
cells, the regeneration of the inner wall of the arteries after vascular injury and the development of atherosclerosis.
Furthermore, we explore the relevance of this receptor for pathological changes involved in the development of diabetes
mellitus and obesity. These studies will give new insights into the pathogenesis of atherosclerosis and will possibly enable
new therapeutic strategies for the treatment of this disease.",4 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=170976&lang=en
170978,Advancing Knowledge Translation: Using Networks to Stimulate Interactions for Public Health Advocacy,Kothari  Anita R,"Kothari, Anita R",Western University (Ontario),Ontario,Canada,200809,300000.0,CIHR New Investigator,Salary Programs,Social / Cultural / Environmental / Population Health,Population and Public Health,Community Health; Knowledge Translation; Mixed Methods; Public Health; Social Network Analysis,"Health issues are becoming more and more complex, and require community agencies to work together for lasting solutions.  For example, ensuring food safety requires local food producer groups, retailers, public health inspectors and others to work collaboratively to identify the best policies to safeguard the public.  In fact, public health units are taking on new roles as coordinators of various community agency collaborations; these collaborations or networks ought to be structured effectively so that research and other information can be easily shared among network members.  The shared information will help networks successfully advocate for legislation that protects their communities' health.  The goal of this study is to determine the extent to which networks are effective structures for knowledge sharing, and to determine if networks lead to collaborative health advocacy activities.  To accomplish this we will recruit, through public health units, 10 community networks focused on the topic of health inequities.  Half of these networks will receive assistance (an intervention) consisting of a series of facilitated discussions such that participants can self-identify weaknesses in their current networks (e.g., does the network include all the key players?).  The intervention ought to lead to improved network structures, interactions and information sharing among network members.  Data will be collected through surveys at baseline and post intervention to determine if the intervention was successful.  Additional data will be collected by focus groups after the intervention to determine if the networks that received the intervention engaged in more advocacy activities than those networks that did not receive the intervention.  This study will demonstrate if networks can be strategically proactive with respect to a complex issue- health inequity - and thus demonstrate public value.",5 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=170978&lang=en
170981,"Epigenetic, molecular and cellular effects of folic acid supplementation: In vitro and preclinical studies to elucidate potential adverse effects of folic acid supplementation on human health and disease",Kim  Young-In J,"Kim, Young-In J",University of Toronto,Ontario,Canada,200809,751090.0,Operating Grant,Operating Grants,Biomedical,"Nutrition, Metabolism and Diabetes",Aging; Epigenetics; Folate/Folic Acid; Gene-Nutrient Interactions; Maternal Nutrition/Fetal Health; Vitamins,"Folate, a B vitamin is generally regarded as safe and has long been presumed to be purely beneficial, and is in fact promoted as the ultimate functional food component for disease prevention. In Canada, an overwhelming body of evidence for a protective effect of periconceptional folic acid supplementation on neural tube defects led to mandatory folic acid fortification in 1998. Also, up to 40% of the Canadian population are taking folic acid supplementation. Over the past decade, the Canadian population has been exposed to a drastic increase in folate intake, for which essentially no data on safety exist.  No studies have been done to look directly or even indirectly for the adverse effects of greatly increased folate intakes. Although folate fortification has significantly improved folate status and reduced neural tube defects rates in Canada, the possibility remains that the vast majority of the Canadian population, who are not at risk of neural tube defects but have been unintentionally exposed to high amounts of folic acid, may benefit less and may even experience unexpected, potentially serious adverse effects from an increase in folic acid intake. Indeed, an emerging body of evidence has recently warned of new potential harmful effects of folic acid supplementation.  Although health consequences of folate insufficiency and deficiency have been extensively studied, studies examining the adverse effects of folic acid supplementation on health outcomes and underlying mechanisms are lacking. The developing fetus and the aging population might be particularly vulnerable to adverse effects of high levels of folic acid. We propose to conduct animal and mechanistic studies to determine potential adverse effects of folic acid supplementation and associated mechanisms in these vulnerable subgroups.",5 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=170981&lang=en
170982,"Novel aspects of amine oxidase catalysis: mechanisms, consequences and therapeutic targets",Holt  Andrew,"Holt, Andrew",University of Alberta,Alberta,Canada,200809,466392.0,Operating Grant,Operating Grants,Biomedical,"Neurosciences, Mental Health and Addiction",Chromatography/Mass Spectrometry; Enzymology; Kinetics; Protein Crystallography; Radioligand Binding; Site-Directed Mutants,"Inhibiting the monoamine oxidase B (MAO-B) enzyme in the human brain enhances availability of several neurotransmitters and neuromodulators. As a result, MAO-B inhibition is effective in slowing the progression of Parkinson's disease, and may help people having difficulty in stopping smoking. The potential health benefits to Canadians of a drug which inhibits MAO-B, without affecting other related enzymes, are therefore substantial. However, the only drug available works well in the laboratory, but loses selectivity in patients, while a recent clinical trial of a novel drug with improved properties failed because of toxicity issues.
Designing a new MAO-B inhibitor requires that we understand how MAO-B works, and how it differs from closely related enzymes. With such knowledge, we can exploit these differences in mechanism and structure to design new potent and selective drugs. Our CIHR-funded research has generated significant new data that allow us to understand some of the most critical differences between MAO-B and related enzymes. Our current application proposes to use a variety of techniques to expand upon our preliminary observations and fully characterise two novel sites on the MAO-B protein. We propose that these sites represent novel targets for future inhibitors that will form a new class of antiParkinsonian and smoking cessation therapies.",5 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=170982&lang=en
170984,Identification and functional analysis of a novel metastasis-associated gene in prostate cancer,Wang  Yuzhuo,"Wang, Yuzhuo","BC Cancer, part of PHSA (Vancouver)",British Columbia,Canada,200809,541348.0,Operating Grant,Operating Grants,Biomedical,Cancer Research,Human Cancer Xenografts; Metastasis; Prostate Cancer; Rgs1,"Most deaths from prostate cancer (PCa) are due to metastases (cancer spread) in a form that is highly resistant to conventional therapies. There is an urgent need for more effective therapy to improve disease survival and management. Thus, we have been focusing on discovering new metastasis-associated genes that can be used as either as biomarker or therapeutic targets. In doing so, we have previously established SAGE (Serial Analysis of Gene Expression) libraries based on our unique prostate cancer models (i.e. a metastatic prostate cancer tissue subline (PCa1-met) and its non-metastatic counterpart (PCa2), both derived from one patient's cancer specimen). An analysis of this system has revealed that the regulator of G-protein signalling 1   (RGS1) gene is overexpressed in the metastatic subline. This finding was confirmed by both RT-PCR and immunohistochemical analysis of PCa1-met and PCa2 tumor tissues. Importantly, our preliminary data indicate that RGS1 protein is overexpressed in clinical samples of prostate cancer (PCa) relative to benign prostate. While RGS1 has not previously been associated with PCa, its mRNA and/or protein are reported to be highly expressed in several different types of carcinoma, including melanoma, cervical cancer, and head and neck squamous cell carcinoma; in particular, RGS1 overexpression is significantly correlated with sentinel lymph node metastasis. This suggests that the RGS1 gene plays a key role in the metastatic process. This study is aimed at proving the clinical relevance, functional importance and potential mechanism of RGS1 in prostate cancer and prostate cancer metastasis. Significance: This study may demonstrate that the RGS1 gene provides a new therapeutic target and/or prognostic tool for metastatic prostate cancer. If so, it could lead to urgently needed improvements in the management of the disease.",4 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=170984&lang=en
170990,"Glial cell differentiation, function and neuron-glial interactions in the CNS",van Meyel  Donald J,"van Meyel, Donald J",Research Institute of the McGill University Health Centre,Qu&eacute;bec,Canada,200809,672750.0,Operating Grant,Operating Grants,Biomedical,"Neurosciences, Mental Health and Addiction",Cell Differentiation; Drosophila; Glia; Nervous System; Neuron,"The human central nervous system (CNS) is comprised of cells of two major classes, neurons and glial cells. Interactions between them are vital for the CNS to develop and function properly, but little is known of the molecular mechanisms by which this occurs. Disruption of neuron-glial interactions may underlie a number of human diseases. The van Meyel laboratory uses a simple organism - the fruit fly Drosophila - to better understand molecular and cellular interactions between neurons and glia during development. Drosophila has been well-studied and has proven to be a useful genetic model for many avenues of biomedical research. Neurons and glial cells in the Drosophila CNS display many of the same molecular
and functional properties as neurons and glia in humans. To study glial cell differentiation and neuron-glial interactions, we
focus on an interesting subtype of Drosophila glia called the longitudinal glia (LG). We found that communication between
neurons and LG occurs through a particular molecular signaling pathway mediated through the Notch receptor molecule.
This receptor's signaling pathway is also important for glial cell differentiation during nervous system development in
mammals. We will use genetic studies in Drosophila to better understand mechanisms by which glial cells contribute to
human nervous system development, function and disease. By studying LG, we will first identify additional molecules that
also participate in glial cell development and differentiation. Second, we will study how the Notch receptor influences the
development and differentiation of these glial cells. Third, we have developed a Drosophila model for episodic ataxia in humans. Using this model, we will study how LG can influence the function of connections between neurons that are important for locomotion.",5 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=170990&lang=en
170992,Does low Vitamin D status of older Canadians predict functional decline?,Gray-Donald  Katherine A,"Gray-Donald, Katherine A",McGill University,Qu&eacute;bec,Canada,200809,91458.0,Operating Grant,Operating Grants,Social / Cultural / Environmental / Population Health,"Nutrition, Metabolism and Diabetes",Functional Declines With Aging; Nutrition And Aging; Nutritional Epidemiology,"Several studies have studied vitamin D status and functional decline in the elderly, but the results have been very inconclusive. In people (usually institutionalized sick elderly who have very low levels of vitamin D in their blood) there is a benefit from supplementation with vitamin D. As most elderly people in Canada, however, are healthy and live at home, get outdoors and eat well, their vitamin D levels are not usually severely compromised but we have found that over 50% of our Quebec healthy community dwelling elderly population have suboptimal vitamin D levels warranting further examination. From existing data on a large group of healthy elderly Quebecers whom we have followed over 3 years and measured declines in their functional status we will study whether optimal Vitamin D status protects against functional decline in a healthy aging population.",2 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=170992&lang=en
170994,The role of inflammation in the brain response to ischemic injury,Kriz  Jasna,"Kriz, Jasna",Universit&eacute; Laval,Qu&eacute;bec,Canada,200809,631930.0,Operating Grant,Operating Grants,Biomedical,Aging,Brain Repair; Cerebral Ischemia; Functional Recovery; Live Imaging Of Inflammation; Pro- And Anti-Inflammatory Treatments; Transgenic Animals,"Stroke is the third leading cause of death in industrialized countries. Unfortunately, at present, the clinical treatments remain poorly effective. There is increasing evidence that inflammation plays an important role in central nervous system (CNS) ischemia. Here, it is important to mention that inflammatory response after stroke occurs several hours after initial attack and may last for several weeks thus leaving enough time for therapeutic interventions. The aim of this project is to study the role of inflammation in ischemic brain injury and to develop novel therapeutic strategies by modulating inflammatory response to promote brain repair and recovery. To address these important issues we generated series of novel transgenic mouse models which allow us to visualize the processes of inflammation and brain repair. In these novel disease mouse models we can longitudinally study progression of brain injury after stroke and analyze the effects of novel pharmacological treatments from the brains of living animals using in vivo bioluminescence/biophotonic imaging. The in vivo results obtained in our preliminary studies suggest that inflammatory response after stroke lasts much longer than initially thought (several months after stroke) and therefore may represent a good therapeutic target to stimulate brain recovery.",5 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=170994&lang=en
170995,Molecular control of germline apoptosis in C. elegans,Derry  William B,"Derry, William B",Hospital for Sick Children (Toronto),Ontario,Canada,200809,594615.0,Operating Grant,Operating Grants,Biomedical,Genetics,Apoptosis; Cancer; Genetics; Neuroblastoma; P53; Ubiquitin Ligases,"Cells that make up the tissues and organs of multicellular organisms must be maintained at a relatively constant number to maintain viability and prevent disease.  If this intricate balancing act is tipped to favour too much cell survival an organism can develop cancerous tumors. Genes that regulate cell survival and suppress cancer are well conserved in evolution and are easy to study in simple organisms, such as worms and flies.  We use the nematode worm Caenorhabditis elegans as a model system to understand the molecular basis of how these genes regulate cell death. In the previous granting period we discovered a novel gene that controls the killing activity of tumor suppressor p53, the most frequently mutated gene in human cancer. Recently, we translated this discovery to human cancer cells and found that the human equivalent of this gene (FBX045) possesses similar cell killing properties as the worm gene.  We propose here to determine the mechanism by which this gene controls the cell killing activity of p53 using a combination of genetics and molecular approaches in C. elegans and human tumor cells.  We anticipate that these studies will lay the foundations for designing new and more effective therapeutics for the clinical treatment of cancer.",5 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=170995&lang=en
170996,Development of audit with feedback intervention to improve acute cardiovascular care using APPROACH,Sales  Anne E,"Sales, Anne E; Ghali, William A; Knudtson, Merril L",University of Alberta,Alberta,Canada,200809,148699.0,Operating Grant,Operating Grants,Health systems / services,Health Services and Policy Research,Audit With Feedback; Cardiac Disease; Databases; Knowledge Translation; Quality Improvement,"In this research project, we are proposing to develop highly effective reports to give health care professionals, including heart specialists, primary care doctors, nurses, and pharmacists, to help them understand where the care they are currently giving patients with heart disease falls short of current standards.  The reports will be based on information that is already collected on all patients who are admitted to the hospital with heart disease and who have specific procedures done to look at the state of their heart and the blood vessels that supply it.  These procedures include cardiac catheterization, where a special instrument is inserted into the body and used to view the arteries of the heart.  Information about patients with heart disease, especially those who have had a cardiac catheterization, has been collected in the province of Alberta for over ten years. Once the reports are developed, we will distribute them to heart specialists, primary care doctors, nurses, and pharmacists who are involved in caring for patients with heart disease in three hospitals in Alberta, including more rural and more urban hospitals, as well as to care providers in primary care practices that are linked to the hospitals.  We will do surveys and observe providers to learn how they respond to the reports, and whether they change their practice to improve the quality of care patients receive.  We will use the information we obtain from this study to develop a randomized controlled trial, which will allow us to test  whether the intervention works in a bigger, more representative group of hospitals.  The information we will get from this study will allow us to develop an efficient, lower-cost randomized controlled trial.",2 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=170996&lang=en
171003,Enzyme Variants as Biomarkers of Prostate Cancer and Anthracycline-based Cardiotoxicity.,Riggs  Wayne K,"Riggs, Wayne K; Grigliatti, Thomas A; Reid, Ronald E",University of British Columbia,British Columbia,Canada,200809,440222.0,Operating Grant,Operating Grants,Biomedical,"Nutrition, Metabolism and Diabetes",Androgens; Anticancer Drugs; Biomarkers; Cardiotoxicity; Genetic Polymorphisms (Snps); In Vitro Drug Metabolism; Insect/Bacterial Cells; Oxidative Stress; Prostate Cancer; Reducatase Enzymes; Ugts,"The reductases are metabolic enzymes responsible for the regulation/control of various hormone pathways in the body.  One of these is the regulation of testosterone and dihydrotestosterone concentrations, which play an important role in the development and progression of prostate cancer.  This type of cancer will develop in one of seven men during their lifetime and one in twenty-seven will die as a result of this disease.  These enzymes are also responsible for the breakdown/metabolism of drugs such as doxorubicin and daunorubicin which are commonly used in the treatment of breast cancer and leukemias.  A potentially serious side effect with the use of these two anticancer drugs is chronic toxicity to the heart, which can be fatal in upwards of 30-50% of treated patients.

Our research is examining the effect of genetic variation that exists from individual to individual in these enzyme pathways.  We postulate that genetic variants in the testosterone and dihydrotestosterone metabolic pathways will result in increased concentrations of these two hormones which will result in the development or further progression of prostate cancer.  This is particularly important for dihydrotestosterone.  In a similar manner, if the elimination of doxorubicin or daunorubicin is decreased we postulate they will accumulate in the body and result in toxicity to the heart, which is a side effect seen with these two drugs in about 10% of treated patients.

The goal of our research is to develop a clinical assay or diagnostic test to detect the presence of variants in the reductase enzymes that can be used as markers to predict the development of prostate cancer or anthracycline induced heart toxicity.  Knowing the genetic make up of these enzyme pathways in patients will permit physicians to choose better therapies to significantly reduce mortality and morbidity in patients with these, and potentially other, types of cancer.",3 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=171003&lang=en
171014,Signal transduction pathways leading to myosin light chain phosphorylation in renal afferent and efferent arterioles,Loutzenhiser  Rodger D,"Loutzenhiser, Rodger D",University of Calgary,Alberta,Canada,200809,675350.0,Operating Grant,Operating Grants,Biomedical,Circulatory and Respiratory Health,Afferent Arteriole; Efferent Arteriole; Myosin Light Chain; Phosphorylation; Renal Microcirculation; Vascular Smooth Muscle,"Each human kidney contains 1 million tiny structures called glomeruli. The glomeruli filter the blood as the first step in its
purification by the kidney. Two very important blood vessels, the afferent and efferent arterioles, control the inflow and
outflow of blood to and from each glomerulus and control the filtration rate by regulating the pressure within the glomerular
capillaries. When the afferent vessel constricts, glomerular pressure is reduced, whereas when the efferent arteriole
constricts, glomerular pressure is increased. It is well appreciated that in the healthy kidney, the reactivity of these two
vessels is independently controlled. For example, when blood pressure is reduced, dilation of the afferent arteriole and
vasoconstriction of the efferent arteriole preserve kidney function by maintaining filtration pressure. In contrast, when blood
pressure is increased, as in hypertension, a selective vasoconstriction of the afferent arteriole prevents injury to the
glomerulus. We also know that diseases, including diabetes and chronic kidney disease (CKD), are associated with changes
in the reactivity of the renal arterioles. Although these vessels are of obvious importance, little is known about the
biochemical processes regulating their function. The reason for the lack of knowledge in this critical area is that it was not
previously possible to perform such experiments. These vessels are exceedingly small (1/10th the size of a human eyelash)
and are not readily accessible. We have developed methods to obtain individual afferent and efferent arterioles and to
examine the key biochemical steps regulating vasoconstriction. The initial studies outlined in our proposal will define the
differing biochemical pathways regulating function in the afferent and efferent arteriole and will provide a basis for
subsequent studies determining how these mechanisms are altered in diabetes and CKD.",5 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=171014&lang=en
171017,Effects of aerobic exercise on asthma morbidity,Bacon  Simon L,"Bacon, Simon L",CIUSSS du Nord-de-l'Ile-de Montr&eacute;al - H&ocirc;pital Sacr&eacute; Coeur,Qu&eacute;bec,Canada,200809,323025.0,Operating Grant,Operating Grants,Clinical,Circulatory and Respiratory Health,Aerobic Exercise; Asthma Control; Asthma Events; Asthma Quality Of Life; Inflammation; Treatment,"Asthma is a chronic disorder of the airways primarily driven by increased airway inflammation, and is an escalating medical problem in Canada. For example, between 1994 and 2001 there was a 40% increase in the number of Canadians who had asthma. Not only is the prevalence of asthma increasing but there has been a rapid rise in the number of asthma events and costs associated with asthma and poor asthma control. It has been estimated that the global cost of caring for asthma exceeds that of AIDS/HIV and tuberculosis combined. These increases have occurred in spite of the development of clear asthma management guidelines. There is evidence to suggest that aerobic exercise, e.g., running or cycling, may improve asthma symptoms and control in children. However, there are currently no studies that have systematically assessed the effects of exercise on asthma control or symptoms in adults. The current proposed study will assess the effects of aerobic exercise in sedentary patients with poorly controlled asthma. In addition to usual medical care, 52 patients will participate in a supervised aerobic exercise program. The program will consist of 3 X 1hr sessions of supervised exercise per week for 16 weeks. Another 52 patients will only maintain usual medical care. The asthma control, quality of life, asthma events, and inflammatory profile will be evaluated at baseline and following the 16 weeks of treatment. We believe that: (1) The exercise intervention will significant improve asthma control and asthma quality of life; (2) The exercise intervention will result in significant improvements in inflammatory profiles; and (3) These changes in the inflammatory profile will be directly related to the improvements in asthma control and quality of life.",3 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=171017&lang=en
171018,A mixed-methods study of the experiences of Canadian maternity care providers and key informants with planned home birth,Vedam  Saraswathi,"Vedam, Saraswathi",University of British Columbia,British Columbia,Canada,200809,298277.0,Operating Grant,Operating Grants,Health systems / services,Health Services and Policy Research,Collaborative Maternity Care; Constant Comparative Analysis; Health Resource Allocation; Interprofessional Communication; Mixed Methods; Regression Analysis,"In Canada today, there is a serious shortage of doctors and midwives who can take care of mothers and babies, and regional inequities in available birth settings.  A woman's choice of birth site assumes she has a range of options and access to qualified providers. The attitudes of medical providers towards maternity care options have been shown to influence the nature of informed decision-making discussions, and patient choice.  This study examines the attitudes of doctors and midwives towards practice in the home, and personal and professional experiences that predict those attitudes.  

Women who live in cities are faced with the prospect of hospitals that do not have enough beds or staff to care for them during pregnancy and birth and a limited choice of maternity care providers.  Women in rural, remote, and First Nations communities often must leave their homes and families for several weeks before and after birth, to travel to centers where doctors or midwives are available.   Building and staffing enough hospitals to meet the need will take significant time and money. The available research shows that healthy women can can safely plan home births if doctors or midwives provide prenatal and delivery care, and help families make informed decisions about which women and babies will benefit from hospital services.  Currently, however, there are not enough maternity providers in Canada who are willing or able to provide home based care, so most women cannot choose this option. The information will help to guide health planning, development of new funding models, and educational programs that will enable physicians and midwives to work together to provide optimal maternity services in all settings.",3 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=171018&lang=en
171019,Evaluating and Improving the Quality of Care and Outcomes of Percutaneous Coronary Interventions in Canada,Ko  Dennis,"Ko, Dennis",Institute for Clinical Evaluative Sciences-Toronto,Ontario,Canada,200809,300000.0,CIHR New Investigator,Salary Programs,Health systems / services,Health Services and Policy Research,Determinants Of Outcomes; Health Services Utilization; Percutaneous Coronary Interventions; Performance Measures; Quality Of Care,"Heart disease continues to be the leading cause of morbidity and mortality in Canada. Recently, treatment of heart disease patients has increasingly relied upon minimally invasive procedures such as Percutaneous Coronary Intervention, commonly known as angioplasty. Angioplasty is a procedure that can unblock a coronary artery without the use of open-heart surgery. Most angioplasty procedures involve using a balloon catheter and a stent to push the blockage against the arterial wall and thereby reducing the narrowing of the artery. In the past decade, the number of angioplasty procedures has more than doubled in Canada. In fact, angioplasty has surpassed bypass surgery as the most common procedure to treat heart disease patients. 

Although angioplasty is very popular, there is evidence to suggest that angioplasty is not being used optimally across Canada. For example, we do not know whether patients are getting good or bad angioplasty, or whether angioplasty is being overused, underused or misused. 

Our ambitious goal is to set national standards to understand and measure the quality of care and outcomes of angioplasty across Canada.  We will call on experts across Canada to develop new Canadian angioplasty standards. They will be asked to rate different aspects of angioplasty as unimportant, fairly important, and very important. In this way, a standard of what is a good angioplasty will be developed. We will then look at whether these standards are being met in patient across Canada who receives angioplasty.
  
This kind of initiative on angioplasty has never been done in Canada. The standard we develop can be applied to every angioplasty patient in Canada. It will serve to ensure angioplasty procedures are being used in the most appropriate and effective manner. Our ultimate goal is to see outcome improvement among all patients receiving angioplasty in Canada.",5 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=171019&lang=en
171021,Effects of aerobic exercise on asthma morbidity,Bacon  Simon L,"Bacon, Simon L","Concordia University (Montreal, Quebec)",Qu&eacute;bec,Canada,200809,300000.0,CIHR New Investigator,Salary Programs,Clinical,Circulatory and Respiratory Health,Aerobic Exercise; Asthma Control; Asthma Events; Asthma Quality Of Life; Inflammation; Treatment,"Asthma is a chronic disorder of the airways primarily driven by increased airway inflammation, and is an escalating medical problem in Canada. For example, between 1994 and 2001 there was a 40% increase in the number of Canadians who had asthma. Not only is the prevalence of asthma increasing but there has been a rapid rise in the number of asthma events and costs associated with asthma and poor asthma control. It has been estimated that the global cost of caring for asthma exceeds that of AIDS/HIV and tuberculosis combined. These increases have occurred in spite of the development of clear asthma management guidelines. There is evidence to suggest that aerobic exercise, e.g., running or cycling, may improve asthma symptoms and control in children. However, there are currently no studies that have systematically assessed the effects of exercise on asthma control or symptoms in adults. The current proposed study will assess the effects of aerobic exercise in sedentary patients with poorly controlled asthma. In addition to usual medical care, 52 patients will participate in a supervised aerobic exercise program. The program will consist of 3 X 1hr sessions of supervised exercise per week for 16 weeks. Another 52 patients will only maintain usual medical care. The asthma control, quality of life, asthma events, and inflammatory profile will be evaluated at baseline and following the 16 weeks of treatment. We believe that: (1) The exercise intervention will significant improve asthma control and asthma quality of life; (2) The exercise intervention will result in significant improvements in inflammatory profiles; and (3) These changes in the inflammatory profile will be directly related to the improvements in asthma control and quality of life.",5 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=171021&lang=en
171023,Health Consequences of Gendered Economic Migration: The case of undocumented Latin American workers in Ontario,Gastaldo  Denise,"Gastaldo, Denise; Magalhaes, Lilian V",University of Toronto,Ontario,Canada,200809,156897.0,Operating Grant,Operating Grants,Social / Cultural / Environmental / Population Health,Gender and Health,Access To Health Care; Gender Differences; Health Promotion; Social Determinants Of Health; Undocumented Immigrant Workers; Working Conditions,"Over the past 10 years, undocumented migration has been the fastest growing form of immigration worldwide.  In Canada, the largest concentration of undocumented workers is in Ontario, with current estimates of over 200,000 people. However, this population remains strikingly understudied in the scientific literature.  Both in Canada and internationally, health researchers have seldom focused on non-status workers despite the fact that they face multiple sources of oppression, often encounter multiple barriers or exclusion from health care services and frequently work in hazardous environments.  Therefore, the main goal of this study is to explore the health consequences of undocumented work in Ontario, focusing on the gender differences in terms of the effects of social exclusion and working conditions. Interviews and body mapping techniques will be used to collect data. The study is supported by community partners and an advisory board and intends to generate relevant knowldege to those serving these communities.",2 yrs 6 mths,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=171023&lang=en
171024,Evaluation of Mitigation Strategies for Pandemic Preparedness in Canada,Moghadas  Seyed M,"Moghadas, Seyed M; Pizzi, Nicolino (Nick); Wu, Jianhong",University of Winnipeg,Manitoba,Canada,200810,94750.0,Catalyst Grant: Pandemic Preparedness,Operating Grants,Health systems / services,Infection and Immunity,Computer Simulations; Influenza Pandemic; Knowledge Translation And Policy Analysis; Public Health Mitigation Strategies; Social Structure And Network Dynamics; Transmission Routs,"Given the threat of an unprecedented spread of the highly pathogenic avian influenza strain H5N1 in humans, and considering the high degree of morbidity and mortality of previous pandemics, research into identifying effective disease control measures is an unavoidable priority. In light of this, the specific objectives of this proposal are: (i) Evaluate the impact of public health mitigation strategies on the spread of pandemic influenza in Canada; and (ii) Develop a predictive framework for subsequent evolution of the virus during a pandemic, which can be used to assess the likely outcomes of public health interventions.

These objectives will be achieved through a reliable, efficient, and adaptable computational system that will be thoroughly evaluated by our stakeholder advisory group from Canadian healthcare departments and agencies involved in pandemic preparedness.
Prior to the emergence of a novel pandemic strain, it is not possible to study the epidemiologic impact of disease or interventions in a real world environment. Our methodology will provide a valuable framework for synthesizing available biological and epidemiological data. By translating virological and clinical data into epidemiologically meaningful parameters, disparate pieces of information can be transformed into a framework that optimizes health policy decisions. The incorporation of population heterogeneity into a contact network model can permit the development of more nuanced, targeted, or geographically specific control strategies. Economic parameters can also be incorporated into network models, allowing estimation of cost-effectiveness and optimization of resource allocation in the face of competing health and distribution priorities. Finally, this framework is useful for the exploration of uncertainties and to (i) construct ""best and worst case"" projections, (ii) identify important areas for future research, and (iii) estimate the economic attractiveness of such research.",1 yr 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=171024&lang=en
171040,Molecular Examination of Thymocyte Negative Selection in vivo,Baldwin  Troy A,"Baldwin, Troy A",University of Alberta,Alberta,Canada,200809,300000.0,CIHR New Investigator,Salary Programs,Biomedical,Infection and Immunity,Autoimmunity; Central Tolerance; Thymic Selection; Thymus,"T cells are a type of white blood cell that are critical for providing protection against infections and cancer. T cells mature in an organ called the thymus. It is in the thymus where the ability of T cells to discriminate between self and foreign molecules is established. In particular, T cells capable of recognizing foreign molecules are allowed to leave the thymus and enter the circulation, while T cells that recognize self-molecules are eliminated. In humans and mice, it has recently been demonstrated that in cases where self-reactive T cells are not eliminated in the thymus, autoimmune diseases such as diabetes, multiple sclerosis and rheumatoid arthritis may develop. My work seeks to understand how self-reactive T cells are eliminated in the thymus using a mouse model system that accurately reflects this physiological process. This information will greatly increase our knowledge of how autoimmune diseases begin and may provide a means to prevent autoimmune disease in susceptible individuals.",5 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=171040&lang=en
171044,Islet cell stimulus-secretion coupling: The role of mitochondrial uncouplers,Wheeler  Michael B,"Wheeler, Michael B",University of Toronto,Ontario,Canada,200809,931743.0,Operating Grant,Operating Grants,Biomedical,"Nutrition, Metabolism and Diabetes",Beta Cell Metabolism; Beta Cell Uncoupling Proteins; Insulin Secretion; Islet Cell Death; Obesity; Type 2 Diabetes,"Pancreatic beta cells make insulin, which is secreted into the blood to control the levels of blood sugar/glucose. In type 2 diabetes, insulin secretion is impaired, leading to high blood glucose, a condition termed hyperglycemia. Prolonged hyperglycemia leads to many associated medical complications including heart disease, kidney disease and neurological problems that decrease the quality of life and can lead to premature death. In the present grant we strive to understand what causes beta cells to fail to function properly. Three possibilities are that the cells lose the ability to respond to glucose, they die, or a combination of both. In beta cells, the mitochondria, a type of cellular organelle,  produce cellular energy and have been linked to both glucose sensing and cell death activation. In the present grant we propose to study what happens to mitochondria that causes them to malfunction and cause diabetes. Three specific aims are proposed in this grant: The first investigates the role of a mitochondrial protein elevated in diabetes called UCP2, which we hypothesize can cause beta cells to lose glucose sensing and the ability to secrete insulin effectively. The second aim attempts to identify and investigate a drug to suppress UCP2 activity, which we anticipate should restore beta cell function and insulin secretion. The third aim will identify other mitochondrial proteins in beta cells that cause them to die. By understanding what proteins cause beta cell dysfunction (glucose sensing and cell death), we anticipate new sensitive techniques will be identified to detect type 2 diabetes in individuals and new drugs developed that could be used to treat or prevent insulin deficiency in this disease.",5 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=171044&lang=en
171046,Regulation and mechanism of action of transcription factor GATA4 in gonadal function,Viger  Robert S,"Viger, Robert S",Universit&eacute; Laval,Qu&eacute;bec,Canada,200809,760767.0,Operating Grant,Operating Grants,Biomedical,"Human Development, Child and Youth Health",Abnormalities Of Sexual Development; Endocrine Disorders; Gene Expression/Transcription; Gonadal Function; Steroidogenesis; Transgenic Mice,"Reproductive dysfunction is a common medical condition that affects the lives of many Canadians. Examples range from abnormalities of sexual development to male and female infertility. Research into these areas is essential for us to understand, diagnose, treat, and hopefully prevent these problems that, for many, can be devastating. Understanding how genes get turned on or off in a correct spatiotemporal manner (being expressed at the right place and at the right time) is central to the study of biological processes in both health and disease. We have been studying the role of a family of transcription factors, called GATA factors, known for their essential function in regulating the development and function of blood cells, the heart, and the immune system. Transcription factors are proteins that bind to specific sequences on DNA where they modulate the expression of target genes. Interestingly, GATA factors are also prominently found in reproductive organs such as the testis and ovary. However, what these factors do in these tissues remain poorly understood. For the past several years, we have focused on the role played by the GATA4 factor. Due to its crucial role in other systems, our hypothesis is that GATA4 is equally important for normal reproductive development and function. Thus, the present research project proposes to study the role of GATA4 in reproductive function by defining its mechanism of action (e.g., identifying its target genes) and by understanding how its expression and activity is regulated in gonadal cells. Moreover, since human GATA4 gene mutations have recently been identified as causative for congenital heart defects, a particular emphasis will be placed on demonstrating a link between GATA4 and human reproductive function. Our ultimate goal is to use this knowledge as groundwork for developing novel therapies that can be used to improve the reproductive health, and therefore the quality of life, of all Canadians.",5 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=171046&lang=en
171047,Integrated in vivo and ex vivo characterization of cerebrovascular dysfunction and its consequences in transgenic models of Alzheimer's disease,Bedell  Barry J,"Bedell, Barry J",Montreal Neurological Institute-Hospital,Qu&eacute;bec,Canada,200809,507978.0,Operating Grant,Operating Grants,Biomedical,Aging,Alzheimer'S Disease; Animal Imaging; Cerebrovascular Pathology; Mri; Quantitative Immunohistochemistry; Transgenic Mouse Models,"Alzheimer's disease (AD) is known to affect the blood vessels in the brain. Growing evidence points to the fact that abnormalities of the blood vessels play a major role in the development and progression of AD. As such, new drugs which target AD-associated changes in blood vessels represent an exciting and very promising avenue of development for prevention and/or reversal of disease. The ability to determine the effectiveness of these new drugs at an early stage of development is critical to ensuring that only promising agents are moved ahead to further stages of testing.

In this proposal, we plan to develop and evaluate cutting-edge methods to improve our understanding of blood vessel ('vascular') disease. These studies will be performed on 'transgenic' mice, which have been genetically-modified to develop AD-type brain and vascular disease. The methods that we will utilize include memory testing experiments and non-invasive magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) studies of vascular function in the brains of live animals, as well as state-of-the-art techniques for examining vascular disease on post-mortem brain tissue. For the post-mortem studies, we have developed sophisticated methods of measuring very specific disease-related changes in three-dimensions (3D). We have developed a new technology for producing detailed, quantitative images of the microscopic changes which are known to occur during the development of AD. These 3D post-mortem studies will provide complementary information to the data obtained from live animals, and allow us to create a more complete picture of the development of vascular disease and the manner in which it relates to the progression of AD.",3 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=171047&lang=en
171056,Neural mechanisms for contextual control of movement: Top-down and bottom-up influences on eye-head gaze shifts,Corneil  Brian D,"Corneil, Brian D",Western University (Ontario),Ontario,Canada,200809,818395.0,Operating Grant,Operating Grants,Biomedical,"Neurosciences, Mental Health and Addiction",Electromyography; Extracellular Recording; Extracellular Stimulation; Eye-Head Gaze Shifts; Frontal Cortex; Motor Control,"Humans and other primates are predominantly visual animals. Our dependency on vision necessitated the development of a refined oculomotor system to rapidly change our line of sight (gaze shifts). Large gaze shifts frequently require coordinated movements of both the eyes and the head. Sometimes, the exact same gaze shift can be generated by using just the eyes, by pairing eye movement with a large head movement, or any combination in between. 
     The overall objective of my work is to understand how the brain flexibly coordinates the eyes and head during gaze shifts. The key hypothesis is that the oculomotor brainstem is endowed with two levels: a higher level surpassed when a commitment to shift gaze is made, and a lower level that permits head movements without gaze shifts. By selectively controlling neural activity relative to these differential levels, the brain can appropriately coordinate the eyes and head in different contexts. Such contexts can be divided into top-down processes based on a subject's prior knowledge or expectations, and bottom-up processes stemming from incoming sensory information, such as those related to stimulus position.
     A recurring theme of my research is that the head is not subjected to the same control that dictates eye movements. Our hypothesis predicts that close assessment of the neural control of the head, via recording of the activity of neck muscles, may provide direct insights into the oculomotor system on a millisecond timescale. An exciting implication of this prediction is that it is readily transferable to humans. If true, neck muscle recordings in humans may provide a quantifiable measure of the oculomotor system at a temporal resolution only currently possible in animals. Such a tool could be helpful in assessing a variety of clinical conditions, such as neglect syndromes following parietal strokes.",5 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=171056&lang=en
171061,Multi-parametric imaging studies of novel therapeutic agents in rodent models of glioma,Bedell  Barry J,"Bedell, Barry J",Montreal Neurological Institute-Hospital,Qu&eacute;bec,Canada,200809,300000.0,CIHR New Investigator,Salary Programs,Biomedical,Cancer Research,Animal Imaging; Brain Tumours; Glioma; Mri; Pet; Quantitative Immunohistochemistry,"While significant advances have recently been made in the treatment of a variety of cancers, brain tumours called gliomas have generally remained resistant to current drugs. As such, there currently exists a desperate need for the rapid development and evaluation of new agents for the eradication of these devastating tumours. Improving the efficiency of the early development of novel agents for the treatment of gliomas requires the identification of novel biological targets as well as adoption of novel strategic approaches.

We have been evaluating, in rodents, the use of a number of therapeutic agents, with novel mechanisms of action, for the treatment of gliomas. Preliminary data from one of these agents, namely YC-1, indicates it to be an attractive candidate for further investigations. In this proposal, we plan to use multiple, novel means of evaluation of therapeutic potential to provide a comprehensive analysis of the efficacy of new anti-glioma agents, such as YC-1.

Imaging of mouse and rat models of glioma offers an elegant means of assessing the efficacy of novel therapeutic agents. The full potential of imaging in the evaluation of anti-cancer agents, however, has yet to be realized. The majority of imaging studies evaluating therapeutic efficacy have focused on relatively simple measures, such as magnetic resonance imaging (MRI)-defined change in tumor volume. The advent of sophisticated quantitative imaging techniques, which allow for
visualization of intrinsic structural, functional, and molecular properties of gliomas, promises a more powerful means of
monitoring the diverse effects of modern experimental therapeutic agents on the natural evolution of these tumours. As such, we plan to combine advanced MRI, positron emission tomography (PET), and quantitative immunohistochemistry (qIHC) measurements to provide a complete evaluation of the potential for advancing promising agents to studies involving human patients suffering from glioma.",5 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=171061&lang=en
171062,Mechanisms of local and retrograde signaling by NGF in compartmented cultures of rat sympathetic neurons,Campenot  Robert B,"Campenot, Robert B",University of Alberta,Alberta,Canada,200809,430946.0,Operating Grant,Operating Grants,Biomedical,"Neurosciences, Mental Health and Addiction",Compartmented Cultures; Endocytosis; Intracellular Signaling; Nerve Growth Factor; Neurodegenerative Disorders; Neurotrauma,During the development of the nervous system 50% of the neurons that are generated die because their nerve fibers have failed to make correct connections that supply nerve growth factor (NGF) or a similar growth factor to the neurons. We have found that sympathetic neurons in specialized compartmented cultures die when their nerve endings are deprived of NGF because the removal of NGF generates a death signal in the nerve fibers that travels back to the cell body of the neuron and activates mechanisms that kill the neuron. We propose to investigate the detailed mechanism that generates the death signal and transports it to the cell body which will provide insight into how neurons can be kept alive in patients with neurodegenerative diseases or spinal cord or brain injury.,3 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=171062&lang=en
171063,Cholesterol and apoE in the regulation of Aß-induced toxicity,Posse De Chaves  Elena I,"Posse De Chaves, Elena I",University of Alberta,Alberta,Canada,200809,634447.0,Operating Grant,Operating Grants,Biomedical,"Neurosciences, Mental Health and Addiction",Alzheimer'S Disease; Amyloid Beta Peptide; Apoe; Astrocytes; Cholesterol; Intracellular Trafficking,"The discovery that possesion of apolipoprotein E4 is the only risk factor that is consistently found associated with the most common, non-familial form of Alzheimer's disease (AD) led us to focus on the role of cholesterol in the pathogenesis of AD.
Accumulating epidemiological and biological evidence suggests a link between cholesterol levels and the development of AD, and the potential therapeutic effectiveness of statins for AD. The effectiveness of lowering cholesterol levels in decreasing the risk for AD is not absolute and other lines of evidence show controversial results. We have have found that
amyloid-beta, the substance that accumulates in the brain of AD patients, increases cholesterol inside nerve cells. Our hypothesis is that, due to cholesterol accumulation, the compartments inside the cells do not function properly, which in turn leads to the death of the nerve cells. We propose to study the details of cholesterol accumulation inside nerve cells and the impact of the type of apoE (apoE2, apoE3 or apoE4)in preventing cholesterol accumulation. Therapeutic strategies aimed to reduce cholesterol levels are being tested in humans for the treatment of AD, which poses the urgency to fully understand cholesterol homeostasis in neurons. Our studies will help us understand better the reasons behind this devastating disease and will contribute to the final evaluation about the effectiveness and mechanisms of treatment with the cholesterol synthesis inhibitors.",5 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=171063&lang=en
171064,"Regulation of neuroinflammation and neuropathology in multiple sclerosis by the matrix metalloproteinase inducer, EMMPRIN",Yong  Voon W,"Yong, Voon W",University of Calgary,Alberta,Canada,200809,841563.0,Operating Grant,Operating Grants,Biomedical,"Neurosciences, Mental Health and Addiction",Experimental Autoimmune Encephalomyelitis; Matrix Metalloproteinases; Multiple Sclerosis; Neuroinflammation; Neuropathology; Recovery,"Many factors contribute to the progression of multiple sclerosis (MS) including the expression of a family of proteins called matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs). Many MMPs are upregulated in MS lesions and it would be advantageous to switch these off. Dr. Yong will investigate an inducer of the expression of many MMPs, referred to as EMMPRIN.  The research will focus on the expression of EMMPRIN in MS brain lesions, then address how EMMPRIN regulates the pathology of MS, and will further use an animal model of MS in order to examine whether inhibiting EMMPRIN would resolve the disease.  Besides an understanding of the evolution of the MS disease process, this application may provide new insights into a potential new treatment of MS.",5 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=171064&lang=en
171074,3D ultrasound-guided trans-perineal focal prostate therapy platform,Fenster  Aaron,"Fenster, Aaron",Western University (Ontario),Ontario,Canada,200809,631813.0,Operating Grant,Operating Grants,Biomedical,Cancer Research,Image-Guided Therapy; Prostate Focal Therapy; Prostate Therapy; Ultrasound Imaging,"With the exception of non-melanomatous skin cancer, prostate cancer is the most commonly diagnosed cancer and the third highest cause of cancer related mortality in men. It is found at autopsy in 40% of men at the age of 60, and almost 90% at age 90.  Worldwide, it is the second leading cause of death due to cancer in men, accounting for between 2.1% and 15.2% of all cancer deaths.  In Canada, in 2007, over 22,000 men were diagnosed with prostate cancer (over 25% of all male cancers) and over 4,000 (over 10% of all male cancer deaths) died from the disease.  A team of investigators at the Robarts Research Institute have invented technologies for use in diagnosis and treatment of prostate cancer.  Together with collaborators at the London Health Sciences Centre, the London Regional Cancer Centre and the Princess Margaret Hospital, the team is focused on developing a new system for focal treatment of prostate cancer.  Focal therapy of the prostate (the male equivalent of breast lumpectomy) has the potential to treat early prostate cancer effectively without some of the life altering complications associated with surgery and other forms of prostate therapy. Thus, we propose to develop and validate an accurate, precise and adjustable focal prostate therapy/biopsy platform, in which all aspects of the procedure are carried out intra-operatively including planning, monitoring of prostate changes, dynamic re-planning and optimal needle guidance including oblique trajectories. The first therapy approaches to be tested will be cryotherapy and laser ablation.",5 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=171074&lang=en
171078,Endogenous hormones as modulators and targets of polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbon action,Riddick  David S,"Riddick, David S",University of Toronto,Ontario,Canada,200809,685110.0,Operating Grant,Operating Grants,Biomedical,Population and Public Health,Aryl Hydrocarbon Receptor; Cytochrome P450; Gene Expression; Halogenated Aromatic Hydrocarbons; Hormonal Regulation; Polycyclic Aromatic Hydrocarbons,"Hormones are the chemical messengers of the endocrine system that regulate the body's normal functions, and they are also critical in playing adaptive roles in response to events outside the body. Some pollutants found in our environment can interfere with or disrupt the normal body functions that are controlled by hormones. These agents are referred to as ""endocrine disruptors"". Disruption of normal hormone pathways by environmental contaminants can contribute to several adverse or toxic effects, including cancer as well as alterations in growth, development, and reproductive function. Our goal is to understand the mechanisms by which environmental contaminants interfere with the endocrine system. In this way, we will have a clearer appreciation of why exposure to such chemicals can be detrimental and how we can prevent the adverse effects of chemical exposure. Our focus is on environmental contaminants known as aromatic hydrocarbons. This chemical class includes dioxins and polychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs), as well as components of cigarette smoke and other combustion processes. We are studying how hormones produced by the pituitary and adrenal glands control the sensitivity of an organism to the toxic effects of aromatic hydrocarbons and how these chemicals interfere with the normal functions of pituitary hormones. In particular, pituitary growth hormone plays a key role in controlling liver enzymes known as cytochromes P450, which are crucial in the conversion of drugs, contaminants, and hormones into forms that can be eliminated from the body. Increases or decreases in cytochromes P450 are sensitive indicators of aromatic hydrocarbon exposure.",5 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=171078&lang=en
171081,Regulation of skeletal muscle injury and regeneration by angiopoietins,Hussain  Sabah N,"Hussain, Sabah N",Research Institute of the McGill University Health Centre,Qu&eacute;bec,Canada,200809,259476.0,Operating Grant,Operating Grants,Biomedical,Musculoskeletal Health and Arthritis,Angiogenesis; Angiopoietins; Duchenne Muscular Dystrophy; Myogenesis; Respiratory Muscle Injury; Transgenic Mice,"Patients with Duchenne Muscular Dystrophy (DMD) suffers from severe muscle weakness and injury and die of respiratory failure because of inability of the respiratory muscles to ventilate the lungs. The defect in these patients is loss of dystrophin, a protein localized at the cell membrane of skeletal muscle fibers. Recent studies suggest that improving neovascularization inside skeletal muscle improves the recovery of muscles from injury and enhanced muscle fiber performance. Angiopoietin-1 is a newly discovered angiogenesis factor that improves neovascularization in many models of ischemia. In addition, this protein exerts positive effect on cellular survival and proliferation.  In this application, we propose a comprehensive program to evaluate the use of angiopoietin-1 to improve the ability of the respiratory muscles to recover from injury in a model of muscular dystrophy. We will study first the efficiency of increasing angiopoietin-1 expression on the ability of the respiratory muscles to regenerate and recover from injury elicited by a chemical agent (snake venom) applied directly to these muscles and in naturally occurring injury in a mouse model of muscular dystrophy (mdx mice). An increase in angiopietin-1 will be achieved by crossbreeding genetically engineered mice with mice with muscular dystrophy or by using special viruses which are capable of over-expressing angiopoietin-1 protein selectively in skeletal muscles. The second objective of the proposal is to study the effects of angiopoietin-1 on the ability of skeletal muscle stem cells to respiratory muscle injury. We will isolate these cells from normal mice and mdx mice and evaluate the direct effects of angiopoietin-1 on the growth rate and the ability of these cells to migrate to the site of injury. The final objective of the proposal will focus on molecular mechanisms through which angiopoietin-1 improves the capacity of skeletal muscle stem cells to repair muscle injury.",3 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=171081&lang=en
171083,Analysis of regulatory pathways controlling cholesterol and lipid metabolism in Drosophila,King-Jones  Kirst,"King-Jones, Kirst",University of Alberta,Alberta,Canada,200809,300000.0,CIHR New Investigator,Salary Programs,Biomedical,Genetics,Cholesterol Metabolism; Drosophila Genetics; Gene Regulatory Networks; Lipid Transport; Nuclear Receptors; Nutrition,"Obesity has now been identified as the principal risk factor for heart disease, the leading cause of death in Western
societies. In 2004, 32.1% of all Canadian deaths were attributed to cardiovascular diseases, and an additional 3.5% died of
diabetes-related disorders. Understanding the regulatory processes that control fat and cholesterol metabolism is therefore
essential for dissecting the connection between obesity and the onset of atherosclerosis, diabetes, heart disease and other
serious disorders. The absence of a comprehensive model that could explain these relationships originates from our
incomplete understanding of the complex signaling pathways and feedback mechanisms that govern the physiology of fat
tissue and cholesterol homeostasis.
To approach these problems in a simple and highly tractable system, Dr. King-Jones studies evolutionary conserved
pathways controlling lipid and cholesterol metabolism in a classic model organism, Drosophila melanogaster. Specifically,
Dr. King-Jones studies a class of important regulatory proteins called nuclear receptors. Members of this protein family
regulate transcription upon binding to small fat-soluble compounds such as steroid hormones, nutrient metabolites or toxins.
Dr. King-Jones currently examines a gene called DHR96, a close relative of the human nuclear receptor genes SXR and
CAR, because it appears to regulate critical aspects of cholesterol metabolism. These studies could advance our
understanding of metabolic pathways and may shed light on similar processes in humans.",5 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=171083&lang=en
171089,Analysis of regulatory networks controlling cholesterol and lipid metabolism in Drosophila,King-Jones  Kirst,"King-Jones, Kirst",University of Alberta,Alberta,Canada,200809,868128.0,Operating Grant,Operating Grants,Biomedical,Genetics,Cholesterol And Lipid Metabolism; Gene Expression Profiling; Genome Wide Dna-Binding (Chip); Mutant Analysis; Nuclear Receptor; Target Gene Discovery,"Obesity has now been identified as the principal risk factor for heart disease, the leading cause of death in Western societies. In 2004, 32.1% of all Canadian deaths were attributed to cardiovascular diseases, and an additional 3.5% died of diabetes-related disorders. Understanding the regulatory processes that control fat and cholesterol metabolism is therefore essential for dissecting the connection between obesity and the onset of atherosclerosis, diabetes, heart disease and other serious disorders. The absence of a comprehensive model that could explain these relationships originates from our incomplete understanding of the complex signaling pathways and feedback mechanisms that govern the physiology of fat tissue and cholesterol homeostasis. 
To approach these problems in a simple and highly tractable system, Dr. King-Jones studies evolutionary conserved pathways controlling lipid and cholesterol metabolism in a classic model organism, Drosophila melanogaster. Specifically, Dr. King-Jones studies a class of important regulatory proteins called nuclear receptors. Members of this protein family regulate transcription upon binding to small fat-soluble compounds such as steroid hormones, nutrient metabolites or toxins. Dr. King-Jones currently examines a gene called DHR96, a close relative of the human nuclear receptor genes SXR and CAR, because it appears to regulate critical aspects of cholesterol metabolism. These studies could advance our understanding of metabolic pathways and may shed light on similar processes in humans.",5 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=171089&lang=en
171095,Protection against apoptosis in presbycusis and noise/drug induced hearing loss by cochlear transfection of xiap gene in experimental animals,Wang  Jian,"Wang, Jian; Bance, Manohar L",Dalhousie University (Nova Scotia),Nova Scotia,Canada,200809,514921.0,Operating Grant,Operating Grants,Biomedical,Aging,Apoptosis; Cochlear Gene Transfection; Noise; Ototoxicity; Presbycusis/Aging; Xiap,"The receptor cells (the hair cells) and neurons in mammalian ears degenerate with aging. This degeneration is enhanced by damaging factors such as noise and ototoxic drugs. Hair cell death due to aging and many other factors occurs mainly through a process called apoptosis, in which the cell commits ""suicide"" due to the production of several ""killer proteins"". Normally, cells contain specific inhibitors of apoptosis proteins (IAPs) which control these killer proteins. However, natural levels of these inhibitors do not seem sufficient to protect inner ear hair cells and neurons against apoptosis. In our previous study supported by CIHR, we proved that the over-expression of X-linked inhibitory of apoptotic protein (XIAP) in a transgenic mouse model significantly delay the development of aging-related hearing loss and provide protection against the hearing loss induced by noise and ototoxic drugs. 
Therefore, we will extend our study by using inner-ear gene transfection, instead of genetic manipulation at genome level, which is not ethic for humans. This project will explore optimal methods for gene transfection into inner ears of experimental animals. After a sufficient expression of xiap gene in the targeted cells in inner ears is established, we will evaluate if the over-expression of XIAP in inner ears provide similar protections as that seen in the transgenic mice. This research will potentially lead a gene therapy for the inner protection.",4 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=171095&lang=en
171099,Functional characterization of the machinery for clathrin-mediated endocytosis,McPherson  Peter S,"McPherson, Peter S",Montreal Neurological Institute-Hospital,Qu&eacute;bec,Canada,200809,658850.0,Operating Grant,Operating Grants,Biomedical,"Neurosciences, Mental Health and Addiction",Clathrin; Endocytosis; Lentivirus; Synaptic Vesicles,"The information encoded in the human genome is translated into proteins, which are the building blocks for cells and carry out all cellular activities. Once the proteins are made, they need to be transported to the appropriate cellular location. We study the mechanisms by which cells transport proteins. Remarkably, as genetic studies reveal the genes that are altered in human diseases, many of the gene products are found to function in protein transport within cells.",5 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=171099&lang=en
171104,Patient-Centred Communication Intervention,McGilton  Katherine S,"McGilton, Katherine S",Toronto Rehabilitation Institute-UHN,Ontario,Canada,200809,260145.0,Operating Grant,Operating Grants,Health systems / services,Aging,Communication; Intervention; Long-Term Care; Nursing Staff; Quasi-Experimental Design,"Stroke is a leading cause of death in Canada, yet more than 80% of Ontario patients survive. These 300,000 patients who survive each year typically live with substantial limitations and 20% are admitted to a long-term care facility. Some of these patients cannot express their needs, leading to many difficult situations, agitation and depression. Staff in long-term care have not been taught how to interact with these patients and have limited strategies to help patients. In response to this need, we developed a patient-centred communication intervention for nursing staff caring for patients with strokes who have communication impairments. The goals of this study are to determine if the intervention has an effect on: 1) The patient's quality of life, depression, agitation, and satisfaction with care; and 2) The nursing staff's attitudes and knowledge to care for stroke patients with a communication impairment. The researchers will select 6 units in 3 different nursing homes. One unit will be an intervention unit, the other unit will be a control unit. The staff on the intervention unit will receive the intervention. All patients with communication impairments who have been in the facility for more than 1 year will be able to participate, and all nursing staff can participate. The intervention consists of three parts: 1) Development of an individualized communication plan for each patient; 2) One-day workshop for staff; and 3) Staff support system to provide assistance when using the communication plans in practice.  Outcome measures from all the participants will be collected before the intervention takes place at 1 month, 3 months and 6 months after the intervention.  The study will take 3 years to complete and will involve 114 patients and 114 nursing staff. Teaching nursing staff to communicate better with patients with communication impairments has the potential to significantly improve services provided for people surviving a stroke in Canada living in LTC.",3 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=171104&lang=en
171106,The roles of PCSK9 and SKI-1 in Hepatitis C infection,Seidah  Nabil G,"Seidah, Nabil G; Labonté, Patrick",Institut de recherches cliniques de Montr&eacute;al,Qu&eacute;bec,Canada,200809,803260.0,Operating Grant,Operating Grants,Biomedical,Infection and Immunity,Enzymes; Hcv Receptors; Hepatitis C Infection; Lipoprotein Receptor (Ldlr); Proprotein Convertase; Subtilisin-Like Serine Proteinases,"This project will focus on studying distinct aspects of the biochemistry, physiology, genetics and clinical applications of two members of a family of human proteases known as PCSK9 and SKI-1 and their relationship to hepatitis C virus (HCV) infection. Both enzymes are known to regulate the levels of circulating low density lipoprotein (LDL)-cholesterol and fatty acids. We recently genetically linked the liver protein PCSK9 to the development of cardiovascular diseases in humans. We also showed that PCSK9 degrades the major HCV receptors, namely the LDL-cholesterol receptor (LDLR) and CD81. We demonstrated that this effect of PCSK9 results in a drastic reduction of HCV infectivity. The objectives of this proposal center on the characterization of the structural elements in CD81 that recognize PCSK9, and whether these are linked to those recognizing the LDLR. The identification of the CD81 motif implicated in this recognition would allow us to design molecular mimics that could be used to block viral infectivity. We will also develop novel therapeutic approaches aimed to silence SKI-1 and/or increase the expression of PCSK9 and test their efficacy on HCV infection. Finally, the availability of an assay to measure circulating PCSK9 in blood, will allow us to develop diagnostic tools correlating the level of PCSK9 to that of HCV titers in human patients infected by HCV and to test the effects of presently prescribed HCV antivirals on PCSK9 levels.",5 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=171106&lang=en
171113,Brain Mechanisms Determining Sympathetic Hyperactivity and Cardiac Dysfunction in Rats Post MI.,Leenen  Frans H,"Leenen, Frans H",University of Ottawa Heart Institute,Ontario,Canada,200809,820376.0,Operating Grant,Operating Grants,Biomedical,Circulatory and Respiratory Health,Brain Mechanisms; Heart Failure; Humans; Rats; Sympathetic Activity; Sympathetic Nerve Recordings,"Heart failure is a progressive disease, slowly, but surely disabling the patient. In recent years, it has become clear that besides the initial abnormality in the heart (eg heart attack) increased activity of the sympathetic nervous system to the heart plays a major role in the progression of heart failure to terminal disease. Why the sympathetic nervous system shows this increase is not yet understood. The present project has demonstrated that in rats a myocardial infarction (""heart attack"") leads to activation of brain pathways involving a cascade of factors. This cascade causes not only persistent and progressive increase in sympathetic activity but also the progression of the disease. These studies have provided major new insights into the mechanisms leading to the progression of heart failure, which in a later phase, may lead to new approaches to the prevention of progression of heart failure. In studies outlined in this grant proposal we will assess 1) peripheral mechanisms responsible for activation of the brain-pathways involved in the increase in sympathetic activity and 2) sympathetic activity specifically to the heart and kidneys, and its role in the progression of heart failure.",5 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=171113&lang=en
171114,Molecular and cellular biology of human TH17 cells in health and disease,Levings  Megan K,"Levings, Megan K",University of British Columbia,British Columbia,Canada,200809,444664.0,Operating Grant,Operating Grants,Biomedical,Infection and Immunity,Cytokines; Graft Versus Host Disease; Skin Inflammation; T Regulatory Cells; Th17 Cells,"The immune system is designed to recognize the difference between harmful and non-harmful foreign proteins, and to not react against proteins that normally exist in an individual. Unfortunately, when the processes controlling these functions breakdown diseases such as multiple sclerosis, rheumatoid arthritis, and allergy can result. Although many different types of white blood cells work together to regulate immune responses, one of the major players is the CD4+ T cell. Via their ability to make proteins that send messages between cells, known as cytokines, CD4+ T cells have a central role in directing immunity in health and disease. We are interested in studying a newly recognized type of CD4+ T cell, known as Th17 cells, since they are thought to cause much of the tissue destruction and injury in patients with autoimmune diseases. Currently, very little is known about how Th17 cells develop and function in humans, and whether they are responsible for the tissue damage in chronic inflammatory diseases. In addition, it is not clear whether they are regulated in the same way as other types of CD4+ T cells. This proposal aims to address these critical questions, and will better define how Th17 cells may be targeted therapeutically in patients who have diseases that are caused by abnormal inflammatory immune responses.",4 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=171114&lang=en
171115,Molecular mechanism of ABCG1-mediated sterol transport,Zhang  Dawei,"Zhang, Dawei",University of Alberta,Alberta,Canada,200809,539725.0,Operating Grant,Operating Grants,Biomedical,"Nutrition, Metabolism and Diabetes",Atp-Binding Cassette Transporter; Atpase Activity; Cholesterol Efflux; Insect Cell Expression System; Protein Palmitoylation; Protein Purification,"Atherosclerosis is the leading cause of death in Western societies. It is the most important cause of various heart diseases, strokes, myocardial infarctions, and even high blood pressure. Accumulation of excess cholesterol in macrophages (an important cell in atherosclerosis) is a key factor in the development of atherosclerosis. Current therapeutic strategies to prevent atherosclerosis are primarily based on the use of lipid-lowering drugs, statins, which decrease cholesterol synthesis and serum low-density lipoprotein (LDL) cholesterol levels (sometimes referred as the 'bad' cholesterol). The treatment of patients with statins reduces cardiovascular events by about 20 to 40% thereby indicating an important need for new therapies.
Numerous studies have provided unquestionable evidence that plasma levels of high-density lipoprotein (HDL), sometimes referred as the 'good' cholesterol, are negatively associated with atherosclerosis. One of the most important roles of HDL in protection against atherosclerosis is the removal of cholesterol from macrophages. The initial and important step in HDL-mediated removal of cholesterol is the efflux of cholesterol from macrophages. There are two proteins that play an important role in this step which are the so-called ATP-binding cassette (ABC) transporters, ABCA1 and ABCG1. Here we are investigating how these proteins help macrophages remove excessive cholesterol, such as do they pump cholesterol directly out from cells? Do they need other partners?
We will conduct this research using state-of-the-art techniques in combination with several investigative approaches. With the help of other University of Alberta collaborators, we will gain deep insights into how ABC transporters mediate cholesterol efflux and how they help prevent atherosclerosis. The answers to these questions will provide the basis for the develpment of new drugs for the treatment of patients with increased risk of premature cardiovascular disease.",5 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=171115&lang=en
171118,Role of the atypical ERK3/ERK4-MK5 signaling pathway in cell cycle progression and tumorigenesis,Meloche  Sylvain,"Meloche, Sylvain",Universit&eacute; de Montr&eacute;al,Qu&eacute;bec,Canada,200809,888180.0,Operating Grant,Operating Grants,Biomedical,Cancer Research,Cancer; Cell Cycle; Map Kinases; Mouse Genetics; Oncogene-Induced Senescence; Signal Transduction,"MAP kinases are a family of enzymes that play important roles in the control of cell proliferation and survival. Accumulating evidence suggests that these enzymes may be implicated in the pathogenesis of cancer. Our laboratory has identified a novel pathway involving the MAP kinases ERK3 and ERK4 that controls the progression through the different steps of the cell division cycle. Recent results suggest that ERK3 and ERK4 may exert tumor suppressor effect by braking cell proliferation and preventing the propagation of genetic errors. The objective of our project is to characterize the molecular mechanisms by which these enzymes control cell division and evaluate their putative involvement in the pathogenesis of cancer. To this end, we have generated transgenic mouse models bearing inactivating mutations in the ERK3 and ERK4 genes. The knowledge gained from these studies should prove useful for the identification of new and more selective targets for the design of anti-cancer agents.",5 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=171118&lang=en
171123,A survivorship question: Does surveillance mammography after treatment of unilateral primary breast cancer reduce the odds of dying from breast cancer?,Paszat  Lawrence F,"Paszat, Lawrence F",Institute for Clinical Evaluative Sciences-Toronto,Ontario,Canada,200809,136359.0,Operating Grant,Operating Grants,Health systems / services,Health Services and Policy Research,Administrative Data; Breast Cancer Survivorship; Health Services Research; Nested Case Control Design; Surveillance Mammography,"We know that screening mammograms to find breast cancer save lives, from many reliable studies.  However, no reliable study has ever been done to find out if the same is true about check-up mammograms for breast cancer survivors.   There are many reasons why we cannot just assume that they would.  One reason is that some survivors will die because of secondary cancer eventually showing up elsewhere in the body from the original cancer.  Another reason is that it is often difficult to understand mammograms of women who have had radiotherapy, they might not be so accurate.  We have prepared a study that would determine if survivors who have mammograms and who have breast cancer recurrence in the same breast or a new cancer in the opposite breast are less likely to die from breast cancer compared to survivors who do not have the mammograms.
This is important.  We know that only about 60% of survivors have these mammograms regularly.  If we can show that it saves lives, we must make strenuous efforts to promote these mammograms; but if it does not save lives, it would not be appropriate to try to get every survivor to do these mammograms.",2 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=171123&lang=en
171125,"The Impact of Personal, Interpersonal, and Environmental Factors on Changes in Quality of Life for Youth with Chronic Conditions",Mcdougall  Janette,"Mcdougall, Janette; Wright, Virginia F","Thames Valley Children's Centre (London, Ontario)",Ontario,Canada,200809,742340.0,Operating Grant,Operating Grants,Social / Cultural / Environmental / Population Health,"Human Development, Child and Youth Health",Child Health; Chronic Conditions; Latent Growth Curve Modeling; Longitudinal; Multi-Site; Quality Of Life,"Maximizing quality of life for children and youth is a key goal of the Ontario Association of Children's Rehabilitation Services (OACRS) treatment centres. Many supports and interventions are directed toward this goal. It is critical for clients, service providers, and policy makers to understand the key factors that predict changes in life quality for children and youth with chronic conditions. These factors may include personal (e.g., children's emotional functioning), interpersonal (e.g., children's social participation), or environmental factors (e.g., supportive community environments).

This study will address two unexplored research areas: 1) the changing nature of quality of life for youth with chronic conditions over a three-year period, and 2) the factors that predict change in quality of life for these youth. Six hundred youth aged 11 to 17 years (and their parents) who receive services from OACRS centres will participate. Individuals in this age span are expected to experience key life transitions during the three-year period (e.g., changes in school, independence expectations, health and mobility, role within the family and community). Participants will be assessed at four time points. Children and parents will each complete a brief questionnaire that includes two validated measures of quality of life, in addition to a set of measures of factors thought to predict changes in life quality. These measures focus on children's physical and emotional functioning, self-determination, spirituality, social participation, and family and environmental supports. Advanced statistical analysis procedures will be used to evaluate changes in quality of life and to determine predictors of change. The results will inform policy decisions about where to best allocate funds. This information is vital to ensure rehabilitation and allied services address those areas of children's lives that are most likely to maximize their quality of life.",5 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=171125&lang=en
171126,Immuno-endocrine interaction in gut: role in inflammation and host defense,Khan  Waliul I,"Khan, Waliul I",McMaster University,Ontario,Canada,200809,607095.0,Operating Grant,Operating Grants,Biomedical,Infection and Immunity,Cytokines; Entero-Chromaffin Cells; Gut; Host Defense; Infection; Inflammation,"The enormous mucosal surface of gastrointestinal (GI) tract is continuously exposed to a large numbers of food and water-borne microbes and toxic stimuli and is clearly more susceptible to inflammation than any other organ in the body. However, despite this challenge, the gut is rarely overwhelmed by microbial pathogens, suggesting that the GI tract has effective defense system. GI tract contains the largest endocrine organ in the body, and interactions among immune, endocrine and nervous systems are considered to comprise an integrated network of host defense in gut.  Hundreds of thousands of endocrine cells are present throughout the GI tract and react to changes in gut contents by releasing hormones.  The best characterized subset of enteric endocrine cells is enterochromaffin (EC) cells, which synthesize and release serotonin (5-hydroxytryptamine, 5-HT).  5-HT contributes to gut physiology and is considered to be important in maintaining the integrity of gut.  5-HT has been implicated in a number of diseases including functional disorders like irritable bowel syndrome (IBS), inflammatory bowel disease (IBD), and in a number of GI infections. The association between alteration in 5-HT production and various GI diseases highly emphasizes the significance of 5-HT in intestinal pathophysiology. However, the mechanisms regulating the changes in EC cells/5-HT content during infection and inflammation, or the precise role of 5-HT in gut pathology and host defense is still not clear.   This research proposal examines the mechanisms by which immune system regulate turnover of EC cells and 5-HT production and the role of 5-HT in gut pathology and host defense in enteric infection. Understanding the role of 5-HT in gut pathology and host defense will provide new insights into the mechanisms of gut function which may ultimately lead to improved therapeutic strategies in GI functional and inflammatory disorders.",5 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=171126&lang=en
171131,Mechanisms of respiratory motor suppression in sleep: Relevance to obstructive sleep apnea,Peever  John H,"Peever, John H",University of Toronto,Ontario,Canada,200809,300000.0,CIHR New Investigator,Salary Programs,Biomedical,Circulatory and Respiratory Health,Electromyography And Electroencephalography; Neurophysiology/Neuropharmacology; Obstructive Sleep Apnea; Sleep And Breathing; Upper Airway Motoneurons; Upper Airway Motor Control,"Obstructive sleep apnea (OSA) is the most common and severe sleep disorder.  It affects more than 18 million North Americans and causes disturbed sleep, excessive sleepiness, high blood pressure, clogged arteries, stroke, brain damage and shortened lifespan.  A distinguishing feature of OSA is that it occurs exclusively during sleep.  OSA patients breathe normally while awake but not while asleep.  This occurs because the brain fails to keep important throat muscles active during sleep and this causes the airspace to collapse making normal breathing impossible.  Since OSA is caused by overly relaxed breathing muscles, then it should be cured by increasing breathing muscle activity in sleep.  The problem, however, is that scientists do not understand how the brain controls muscles during sleep.  My laboratory's current research efforts are directed toward understanding this important question.  Specifically, we are doing this by determining what chemicals in the brain control muscle activity during sleep.  This information is, in turn, being used to develop new and useful drugs that prevent excessive relaxation of breathing muscles during sleep.  This research is therefore scientifically and clinically important because it proposes a potentially feasible drug treatment for OSA.",5 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=171131&lang=en
171135,Mechanisms of respiratory motor suppression in sleep: Relevance to obstructive sleep apnea,Peever  John H,"Peever, John H",University of Toronto,Ontario,Canada,200809,737490.0,Operating Grant,Operating Grants,Biomedical,Circulatory and Respiratory Health,Electromyography And Electroencephalography; Neurophysiology/Neuropharmacology; Obstructive Sleep Apnea; Respiratory Motor Control; Sleep And Breathing; Upper Airway Motoneurons,"Obstructive sleep apnea (OSA) is the most common and severe sleep disorder.  It affects more than 18 million North Americans and causes disturbed sleep, excessive sleepiness, high blood pressure, clogged arteries, stroke, brain damage and shortened lifespan.  A distinguishing feature of OSA is that it occurs exclusively during sleep.  OSA patients breathe normally while awake but not while asleep.  This occurs because the brain fails to keep important throat muscles active during sleep and this causes the airspace to collapse making normal breathing impossible.  Since OSA is caused by overly relaxed breathing muscles, then it should be cured by increasing breathing muscle activity in sleep.  The problem, however, is that scientists do not understand how the brain controls muscles during sleep.  My laboratory's current research efforts are directed toward understanding this important question.  Specifically, we are doing this by determining what chemicals in the brain control muscle activity during sleep.  This information is, in turn, being used to develop new and useful drugs that prevent excessive relaxation of breathing muscles during sleep.  This research is therefore scientifically and clinically important because it proposes a potentially feasible drug treatment for OSA.",5 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=171135&lang=en
171137,Hypertension and regulation of angiotensinogen gene expression in transgenic mice,Chan  John S,"Chan, John S",Centre hospitalier de l'Universit&eacute; de Montr&eacute;al (CHUM),Qu&eacute;bec,Canada,200809,304731.0,Operating Grant,Operating Grants,Biomedical,Circulatory and Respiratory Health,Angiotensinogen Gene; Diabetes; Heterogenous Ribonucleoprotein F; Hypertension; Kidney; Transgenic Mice,"Hypertension is a medical condition in which the blood pressure is chronically elevated. Persistent hypertension is one of the risk factors for vascular diseases, strokes, heart attacks, heart and kidney failure. Hypertension is invariably associated with the development of diabetic nephropathy (DN). Blood pressure is regulated by a hormonal system, called renin-angiotensin system (RAS). Indeed, clinical and experimental studies demonstrate that chronic administration with inhibitors of angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) or angiotensin II receptor blockers (ARBs) are effective in reducing the blood pressure and ameliorating nephropathy progression as well as reducing morbidity and mortality in hypertensives and diabetic patients but not the cure.  These studies demonstrate that RAS activation is a major risk factor in the pathogenesis of hypertension and nephropathy in diabetes. Angiotensinogen is the sole substrate in the RAS and it is highly expressed in the kidney. This proposal, which concerns the molecular mechanism(s) of regulation of angiotensinogen gene expression by a novel molecule, called heterogenous nuclear ribonucleoprotein F in diabetic kidneys, will increase our knowledge and understanding the regulation of intrarenal RAS activation in diabetes and its role(s) in the pathogenesis of hypertension and nephropathy, thereby contributing directly to improved clinical treatment of hypertension development and nephropathy progression in diabetes.",3 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=171137&lang=en
171139,Physiological functions of the cellular prion protein,Prado  Marco A,"Prado, Marco A",Western University (Ontario),Ontario,Canada,200809,788780.0,Operating Grant,Operating Grants,Biomedical,"Neurosciences, Mental Health and Addiction",Neurodegenerative Disorders; Neurothrophic Activity; Prion; Protein Secretion; Protein Sumoylation; Protein Ubiquytilation,"Prion diseases or transmissible spongiform encephalopathy (TSEs) are characterized by protein aggregation and neuronal degeneration. They affect diverse mammals including bovines (bovine spongiform encephalopathy, BSE) and humans (e.g. Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease). BSE is an important health and economical concern in Canada, due to its potential to affect the food supply and be transmitted to humans. Furthermore, the risks related to iatrogenic contamination by blood transfusion have been recently recognized. Unfortunately, therapeutic interventions in prion diseases are elusive; TSEs are still incurable and fatal. 
Prion infection and pathology requires the expression of a host prion protein, PrPC. The latter is co-opted by prions to convert into an abnormal insoluble form, PrPSc, with possible gain of neurotoxic activity. However, several evidences suggest that this model might be too simplistic. For example, clinical manifestations in TSEs may occur either before or without PrPSc deposits, so it is also plausible that loss of normal functions of PrPC may contribute to pathogenesis. 
The identification of PrPC functions is pivotal for understanding TSEs. Strong evidence for PrPC physiological functions derives from previous description of its association with the Stress Inducible Protein 1 (STI1). Recently, it has been demonstrated that STI1 is secreted by astrocytes. STI1 can protect neurons by binding to PrPC and increasing PKA activity. Moreover, STI1-PrPC interaction evokes neuritogenesis via activation of ERK 1/2.  We hypothesized that STI1-PrPC engagement triggers neurotrophic-like actions that may have fundamental roles in the nervous system. Hence, in order to test this hypothesis and characterize possible PrPC loss-of-function mechanisms in TSEs, we will use a combination of techniques to define pathways involved with STI1 secretion, PrPC transduction of cellular signals and to disturb STI1-PrPC interaction in vivo.",5 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=171139&lang=en
171141,Mechanisms of Regulation of PML Nuclear Bodies,Frappier  Lori D,"Frappier, Lori D",University of Toronto,Ontario,Canada,200809,569660.0,Operating Grant,Operating Grants,Biomedical,Cancer Research,Apoptosis; Ck2; Nuclear Bodies; Promyelocytic Leukemia Protein; Usp7; Viral-Host Protein Interactions,"Human cell nuclei contain several structures referred to as PML bodies because PML (promyelocytic leukemia) proteins form the basis of these structures and alterations to the PML proteins result in loss of these nuclear bodies.  PML nuclear bodies control many important cellular processes including the repair of damaged DNA, cell proliferation and programmed cell death.  Due to these important functions, the loss of PML bodies appears to be an important factor in the development of several types of cancer but the cellular proteins that control the loss of PML bodies are only partly understood.  In addition, PML bodies are part of the cell's defense mechanism to suppress viral infection and viruses in turn have developed mechanisms to disrupt PML bodies thereby facilitating their own replication.  We have recently identified a human protein (USP7) that functions to regulate the levels of PML bodies and PML proteins in the cell and that is usurped by some viral proteins for this purpose. In addition, a screen of 234 proteins from 3 herpesviruses identified 22 viral proteins that modulate or disrupt PML bodies.  We propose to determine the mechanisms by which USP7 and these viral proteins function to alter and disrupt PML bodies and their functional consequences.  This information will greatly increase our understanding of how the formation and loss of PML bodies is regulated and how changes in PML bodies affect cellular processes that control cell transformation and determine whether the cell lives or dies.",5 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=171141&lang=en
171148,Superoxide dismutase-1 abnormalities associated with sporadic ALS,Julien  Jean-Pierre,"Julien, Jean-Pierre",Universit&eacute; Laval,Qu&eacute;bec,Canada,200809,397008.0,Operating Grant,Operating Grants,Biomedical,"Neurosciences, Mental Health and Addiction",Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis; Protein Aggregation; Protein Misfolding; Superoxide Dismutase,"Mutations in the superoxide dismutase (SOD1) gene are responsible for ~20% familial ALS. This corresponds to only ~2% ALS cases. For the vast majority of ALS cases which are sporadic, the causes remain unknown. Recently, our group reported that oxidized wild-type (WT) SOD1 can acquire properties of ALS-linked mutant SOD1 species. Moreover, we have generated a panel of monoclonal antibodies that recognize misfolded SOD1 species produced by SOD1 mutations and that bind epitopes buried in the intact WT SOD1 unless the protein is unfolded. Preliminary data show that some of these specific antibodies can detect SOD1 in post-mortem spinal cord samples from sporadic ALS patients. This proposal is based on the hypothesis that sporadic ALS cases may share with familial ALS a common pathogenic pathway involving misfolding of SOD1. In the next three years, we propose to use our specific antibodies to investigate the misfolded SOD1 species associated with sporadic ALS.",3 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=171148&lang=en
171149,Informing the decision to participate in a clinical trial: Can decision aids improve the quality of trial participation decisions?,Brehaut  Jamie C,"Brehaut, Jamie C",Ottawa Hospital Research Institute,Ontario,Canada,200809,305000.0,CIHR New Investigator,Salary Programs,Health systems / services,Health Services and Policy Research,Decision Making; Ethics; Health Services Research; Informed Consent; Knowledge Translation; Patient Decision Support,"Ever since the development of the Nuremberg Code in response to Nazi war crimes, informed consent has been a cornerstone of the ethical practice of healthcare research. Despite the fundamental importance of this principle, however, there is increasing evidence of a failure of current informed consent processes to apprise participants of even the most basic components of the research in which they are involved. This study seeks to learn whether patient decision aids, tools originally developed to help patients make tough treatment choices, can be used to help potential research participants be better informed about the possible risks and benefits of participation, and make appropriate choices. We propose to develop this new decision support tool by 1) examining the extent to which current informed consent procedures fall short of
standards; 2) interviewing research participants about ways in which the recruitment procedures can be improved; 3)developing a new tool using innovative, iterative design methods, and 4) conducting an initial study of the new tool. This pilot work will provide the groundwork for a larger evaluation study. The larger goal of this work is to change the way research recruitment is typically implemented, away from (barely) informed consent towards high-quality decision-making.",5 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=171149&lang=en
171152,Detection of Acute Kidney Injury after Abdominal Aortic Aneurysm Repair: Role of New Biomarkers,Garg  Amit,"Garg, Amit",London Health Sciences Centre Res. Inc. (Ont.),Ontario,Canada,200809,364929.0,Operating Grant,Operating Grants,Biomedical,Circulatory and Respiratory Health,Abdominal Aortic Aneurysm; Acute Kidney Injury; Biomarkers; Cohort Study; Urine Il-18; Urine Ngal,"About 2% of adults will develop an aneurysm or 'ballooning' of the aorta, the main blood vessel supplying the body. These aneurysms usually form close to the vessels which supply blood to the kidneys. Unfortunately when an aneurysm is being repaired, the kidneys are frequently injured. When kidney injury is severe, a patient needs an artificial kidney machine called dialysis for life support. Unfortunately we don't have good methods to detect early kidney injury after repair, and the diagnosis only becomes obvious a few days after the injury has completely occurred. In this study we will determine whether new biomarkers can better identify kidney injury after aortic aneurysm repair. If we can detect kidney injury early on, we can then consider treatments (both old and new) to help the kidneys work well under stress.",3 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=171152&lang=en
171165,"Aging, neurofunctional reorganization and communication abilities",Joanette  Yves C,"Joanette, Yves C; Ska, Bernadette","CIUSSS du Centre-Sud-de-l'&Icirc;le-de-Montr&eacute;al (Montr&eacute;al, Qu&eacute;bec)",Qu&eacute;bec,Canada,200809,701030.0,Operating Grant,Operating Grants,Clinical,Aging,Aging; Communication; Inter-Hemisphere Dynamics; Magnetic Resonance Imaging (Mri); Near Infrared Spectroscopy; Neurofunctional Reorganization,"This research program is about how the brain reorganizes itself to support the preservation of communication abilities during successful aging. The components of communication that will be studied are important for everyday life as they include the ability to use and process the meanings of words, to understand narratives and to understand the non-literal meanings of utterances such as indirect requests. Using the most powerful neuroimaging technologies -- including functional magnetic resonance and optical imaging -- this study will allow to describe the patterns of neural networks for communication associated with successful aging. At the same time, the impact of education and the relationship with cognitive abilities will be explored.  Overall, this program will allow us to identify the optimal functional reorganization that sustains successful communication with increased age as well as the most suitable rehabilitation strategies for elderly who have to live with communication deficits due to a brain lesion.",5 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=171165&lang=en
171171,Molecular basis of GPCR internalization and trafficking,Laporte  St&eacute;phane A,"Laporte, Stéphane A",Research Institute of the McGill University Health Centre,Qu&eacute;bec,Canada,200809,666970.0,Operating Grant,Operating Grants,Biomedical,Circulatory and Respiratory Health,Arrestins; Biochemistry; Cell Biology; Clathrin-Mediated Internalization; Confocal Microscopy; Congestive Heart Failure,"G protein coupled receptors (GPCRs) are the single largest family of cell surface proteins involved in signal transduction, and represent one of the major pharmaceutical targets. Action of drugs and hormones are intricately linked to the constant presence of these receptors on the cells surface, which in normal condition is regulated by the internalization and intracellular trafficking processes. Deregulation of these processes can lead to abnormal cell behaviors, and the development of pathological conditions.  Although we have gain a basic understanding of some of the components for receptor internalization and trafficking, much remains to be understood on the signaling mechanisms and regulators involved in these events.  Her we propose to use innovative molecular and cell biological approaches to identify and study key regulators for the internalization and intracellular trafficking of the angiotensin and bradykinin receptors; two GPCRs that are important drug targets in cardiovascular therapies. We believe that our study will not only provide new insights into the molecular details for these events, but may also help identifying new targets to improve drug efficiency for hypertension, inflammation and pain.",5 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=171171&lang=en
171192,Asymmetric bidirectional replication (ABR) in mammalian cells,Lee  Hoyun,"Lee, Hoyun",Health Sciences North (Sudbury),Ontario,Canada,200809,625640.0,Operating Grant,Operating Grants,Biomedical,Genetics,Chromatin Immunoprecipitation (Chip); Dbf4 Transcription Locus; Initiation Of Dna Replication In Human Cells; Nascent Strand Abundance Assay; Protein-Dna Interactions; Replication Initiation Point (Rip) Mapping,"Copying of the entire genetic material (i.e., DNA) accurately and timely is essential for maintaining genetic stability in all living organisms, and the deregulation of this process is directly relevant to cancer development. The initiation step is a key control point of the overall DNA replication process, which is relatively simple in bacteria and yeast as their replication machineries (i.e., proteins) interact with well defined DNA segments to copy their genetic materials. However, the replication initiation process is extremely complex in human cells, since the DNA microenvironment and gene organization also play a critical role. We have recently found a novel control mechanism of copying DNA in human cells. A model derived from this work can explain several perplexing questions that many scientists have been trying to answer for decades. One of our main contributions is that our new replication model provides important new insights into the control mechanism of human DNA replication in the context of gene organization and transcription. We here propose to further study this important control mechanism of copying human DNA. In the long run, data from this research program will help us to understand how a cell loses genetic stability and eventually develops cancer.",5 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=171192&lang=en
171203,Biosynthesis of the [NiFe]-Hydrogenase Enzyme,Zamble  Deborah B,"Zamble, Deborah B",University of Toronto,Ontario,Canada,200809,390876.0,Operating Grant,Operating Grants,Biomedical,Genetics,Biochemical And Biophysical Studies; Hydrogenase Activity In E. Coli; Hydrogenase Metallocenter Assembly; Metal-Binding Proteins; Mutant Proteins; Pathogenic Bacteria,"The aim of this research is to determine how [NiFe]-hydrogenase enzymes are made in bacteria.  These enzymes are found in many microorganisms, including the pathogenic bacteria Escherichia coli and Helicobacter pylori, and they are key components in the metabolic pathways that either make hydrogen gas or use it as an energy source.  The enzyme has a complicated catalytic center that contains nickel and iron as well as other components.  It is known that the biosynthesis of hydrogenase enzymes requires the coordinated activity of multiple helper proteins to deliver all of the correct components and assemble the metallocenter correctly.  However, very little is known about how this molecular factory works.  This research is designed to elucidate the molecular details of hydrogenase biosynthesis, with an initial focus on the proteins that insert the nickel into the enzyme center.
     An understanding of this multi-step process is essential in order to realize the potential of hydrogenase enzymes for biotechnology and consumable energy applications, or to evaluate the component proteins as antibiotic targets.  Furthermore, this study will contribute to our knowledge about intracellular transition metal homeostasis, a fundamental aspect of life.",4 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=171203&lang=en
171208,Inhibition of autophagy by the pRb tumor suppressor,Zacksenhaus  Eldad,"Zacksenhaus, Eldad",University Health Network (Toronto),Ontario,Canada,200809,488674.0,Operating Grant,Operating Grants,Biomedical,Cancer Research,Autophagy; Cancer; Myogenesis; Retinoblastoma; Tissue Specific Knockout Mice; Tumor Suppressors,"The tumor suppressor pRb is lost by mutations or functional inactivation in most, if not all, human cancers.  The prevailing view is pRb controls cell proliferation and survival as well as differentiation (i.e. by stimulating the differentiation program). However, we have now demonstrated that during muscle differentiation in culture, pRb is not required for differentiation per se but only for allowing cells to withdraw from the cell cycle and survive during the transition from the proliferative to differentiative states. Specifically we showed that in the absence of pRb, differentiating myoblasts undergo autophagy (self eating) and that inhibition of autophagy allows myoblasts to differentiate and form twitching muscles in the absence of pRb. These results have important implications both to cancer therapy as they suggest that Rb deficient tumors can be induced to differentiate, and to muscular diseases, as autophagy plays an important role in muscle atrophy and several types of muscular dystrophies. We propose a series of experiments to delineate the exact mechanisms by which pRb inhibits autophagy in vitro and in vivo in both differentiating myoblasts and post-mitotic muscles and well as define the role of E2F1-3, the major targets of pRb, in the induction of autophagy in Rb deficient cells.",4 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=171208&lang=en
171211,Neonatal programming by inflammation.,Pittman  Quentin J,"Pittman, Quentin J",University of Calgary,Alberta,Canada,200809,1021295.0,Operating Grant,Operating Grants,Biomedical,"Neurosciences, Mental Health and Addiction",Behaviour; Cytokines; Fever; Neonates; Neuroimmune; Pain,"When people or animals get an infection, the body responds with an immune response that recognizes specific molecules on the infectious agent (eg bacterium or virus) and causes a number of alterations in the body's physiology and behavior that helps to fight the infection. There are synthetic molecules that can be given to mimic the infection, allowing us to study this process without making the animals truly 'infectious'. We are interested in what happen when a newborn has an infection and in how this affects the animal as an adult. Previously we found that 14d old rats that were given a mild 'experimental' inflammation responded, as adults with a markedly reduced inflammatory response. In addition, a number of other changes in the brain were observed, including altered pain sensitivity, altered brain susceptibility to stroke trauma and altered brain excitability (meaning that they were more susceptible to seizures). These findings are of obvious clinical interest and have prompted the preset application in which we will try to identify the underlying cellular and neurochemical mechanisms that underlies these alterations.  Our work will employ behavioral, neurochemical and electrophysiological approaches to test specific hypotheses concerning the involvement of specific molecules and alterations in specific neuronal ion channels and neurotransmitter receptors. We will determine if there are long term changes in genes that code for specific molecules. Finally we will employ a number of interventions, including behavioral enrichment and pharmacological treatments to see if we can reverse the effects of this 'neonatal programming' by inflammation.",5 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=171211&lang=en
171225,Neuronal Morphogenesis in the Visual System,McFarlane  Sarah,"McFarlane, Sarah",University of Calgary,Alberta,Canada,200809,794339.0,Operating Grant,Operating Grants,Biomedical,"Neurosciences, Mental Health and Addiction",Axon Guidance; Dendrite Development; Fibroblast Growth Factors; Gene Transfer; Neural Development; Semaphorins,"Our research aims to understand how neurons acquire their unique morphology during embryogenesis: generally a neuron receives inputs from other cells on its multiple short and highly branched dendrites, and transmits this information long distances via a single, long, thin and unbranched axon. We use as our model the retinal ganglion cell of the eye, whose axon helps form the optic nerve and connects with other neurons in the brain so that the brain can make sense of visual images hitting our retinas. We do this work in the developing frog eye, because  experimentation is quick and easy, armed with the knowledge that the general organization of the eye and the molecules involved in forming the optic nerve are conserved between frogs, mammals and humans. By understanding the molecules and general mechanisms involved in the formation of the optic nerve, we hope to shed light on therapeutic strategies towards reforming damaged nerve connections in the adult, both in the visual system and elsewhere in the nervous system.",5 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=171225&lang=en
171229,"Long-term disability after breast cancer:  Expanding an empirical foundation for education, prevention and rehabilitation",Thomas  Roanne Leigh,"Thomas, Roanne Leigh",University of Saskatchewan,Saskatchewan,Canada,200809,587852.0,Operating Grant,Operating Grants,Social / Cultural / Environmental / Population Health,Gender and Health,Arm Morbidity; Breast Cancer; Interdisciplinary; Knowledge Translation; Lymphedema; Mixed Methods,"Our research indicates that over 50% of breast cancer survivors may experience arm problems after treatment. These problems can be disabling, but few researchers have examined the impact of these challenges on women's everyday lives, and there is no national rehabilitation program for disability after breast cancer. Very little is known about how arm problems affect paid and unpaid labour, intimacy, and child care, or the relationship between arm problems and other illnesses. The lack of research has left health care professionals and breast cancer survivors ill-equipped to address arm problems. Our team has enrolled 745 women in Phase I of our study (2005-2008). In our newly proposed Phase II, we will follow these 745 women over a 5 year period in order to learn how many women will develop arm problems and what types of symptoms they have. More importantly, we will generate knowledge about the extent to which arm problems may be disabling and their impact on women's work, families and leisure activities. This research will help breast cancer survivors and their care providers to better understand and treat arm problems and disability. Phase II will advance knowledge in Canada and beyond, laying a solid foundation for cancer rehabilitation and related policy development.",5 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=171229&lang=en
171230,Occurrence and roles of the lipid mediators of inflammation during pulmonary Influenza virus infections,Borgeat  Pierre,"Borgeat, Pierre; Flamand, Louis",Universit&eacute; Laval,Qu&eacute;bec,Canada,200809,506102.0,Operating Grant,Operating Grants,Biomedical,Infection and Immunity,Bioactive Lipids; Host Defense; Inflammation; Influenza; Leukotrienes; Prostaglandins; Toll-Like Receptors,"This research program is aimed at understanding how the body reacts to infection by viruses such as the Influenza virus, which is the pathological agent of flu. The Influenza virus causes a severe infection of airways (pneumonia) and is reponsible for more than 20,000 deaths annually in the U.S.A only. We will investigate if the immune response to viral infection in the lungs triggers the formation of a group of natural substances called the ""lipidic mediators of inflammation"". In fact, it is believed that it is the inflammatory reaction induced by the infection that causes the disease (and death) rather than the viral multiplication itself. These studies will provide very important informations which could rapidly lead to improvement of the treatment (using already available drugs) of flu and other airway infections such as infections by the SARS coronavirus, as well as of pneumonia caused by bacteria and fungi.",4 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=171230&lang=en
171231,CD9 and its partners: their role in induction of mitotic catastrophe and in irradiation and microtubule-targeted drug sensitivity.,Chevrette  Mario,"Chevrette, Mario",Research Institute of the McGill University Health Centre,Qu&eacute;bec,Canada,200809,313083.0,Operating Grant,Operating Grants,Biomedical,Cancer Research,Cd9; Microtubule-Targeted Drugs Sensitivity; Mitotic Catastrophe And Mitotic Cell Death; Prostate Cancer; Protein Interactions; Radiotherapy Sensitivity,"Numerous genetic changes occur as prostate cancer becomes more aggressive.  We have shown that one such change is the loss of expression of CD9, a protein which is also lost in other human cancers. Re-introduction of CD9 into human prostate cancer cells is sufficient to kill these cells if appropriate CD9 partners are present. Using molecular techniques, we identified two new CD9 partners, namely OVCA2 and Mortalin. We showed that when these proteins (CD9, OVCA2 and Mortalin) interact together, they induce the death of prostate cancer cells by a mechanism called mitotic catastrophe, the form of cell death induced by radiotherapy and by some anticancer drugs. In this project we will decipher the mechanisms by which these partners can kill cancer cells. We will also determine if in combination or by themselves, these proteins can sensitize cancer cells to either radiotherapy or chemotherapeutic drugs, thus opening the possibility of using reduced doses, with the goal of reducing side effects.",3 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=171231&lang=en
171248,Stress and Growth over Time: Caregiving and Bereaved Parents of Children with Life-Limiting Illnesses,Cadell  Susan Anne,"Cadell, Susan Anne","Wilfrid Laurier University (Waterloo, Ontario)",Ontario,Canada,200809,348241.0,Operating Grant,Operating Grants,Social / Cultural / Environmental / Population Health,"Human Development, Child and Youth Health",Bereavement; Caregiving; Palliative And End-Of-Life Care; Pediatrics; Positive Outcomes; Stress And Coping,"Caring for a child with a life-limiting illness is a stressful experience that compounds the usual challenges of parenting. The negative aspects of caring for a child with a life-limiting illness are well documented. In the face of such adversity, however, we also know that parent caregivers can experience positive changes caring for children with even the most serious conditions.

In a previous study, Caregiving Parents of Children with Life-Limiting Illnesses, we developed and tested a model that helps us understand the factors that contribute to personal growth and stress in caregivers of these children; the purpose of the proposed study is to further develop this model. This extended study will allow us to learn more from the parents caring for very sick children as they share their changing experiences over time and also from a second group of parents: those who are bereaved.  As a result, we will be able to investigate the differences in the stress, personal resources, and growth between both parent caregivers and bereaved parents. This is a unique opportunity to study the positive and negative aspects of caregiving and bereavement over time.  

New knowledge obtained from this study will be of tremendous value to parents, practitioners and policy makers concerned with childhood life-limiting illness. Pathways leading to positive outcomes will be identified through this study and will then be used to optimize the emotional, social, and spiritual care available to patients and families receiving paediatric palliative services, including bereavement care.",3 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=171248&lang=en
171253,Role of Group V and Group X secretory phospholipases A2 in the innate immune response to pulmonary bacterial infection.,Rubin  Barry B,"Rubin, Barry B",University Health Network (Toronto),Ontario,Canada,200809,388518.0,Operating Grant,Operating Grants,Biomedical,Infection and Immunity,Bone Marrow Transplantation; Eicosanoid Metabolism; Group V And Group X Secretory Phospholipases A2; Neutrophils; Pneumonia; Pulmonary Bacterial Infection; Transgenic Mice,"Bacterial infection of the lower respiratory tract is a common illness and is also a leading cause of death. It is estimated that 5.6 million cases of community acquired pneumonia are treated annually in North America, resulting in over one million hospitalizations. Bacterial pneumonia is the most common infectious complication of HIV infection. In addition, pneumonia acquired in the hospital is the most common infection in intensive care units, and is associated with high mortality. White blood cells seek out and kill bacteria that enter the lungs - this is the principal mechanism by which humans fight lung infections.
In previous research, our group identified two proteins, called Group V and Group X secretory phospholipases A2, in white blood cells. These results were published in the Journal of Biological Chemistry, a highly respected, peer-reviewed scientific journal.
The purpose of the experiments described in the current grant application is to determine how Group V and Group X secretory phospholipases A2 help humans fight lung infections. To complete these proposed studies, we have obtained mice that have been genetically manipulated such that they lack either Group V and/or Group X secretory phospholipase A2. By infecting normal mice and mice that lack one (or both) of these proteins with bacteria that commonly cause pneumonia in humans, and comparing how well each mouse fights the infection, we will be able to define the role played by Group V and Group X secretory phospholipases A2 in the lung infections.
The new knowledge gained through these studies will increase our understanding of the basics mechanisms involved in the immune response to bacterial infection of the lung, and may lead to the development of novel therapeutic options for patients with bacterial lung infections.",4 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=171253&lang=en
171256,Importance of PGE2 in CCR7-dependent migration of monocytes/macrophages to lymph nodes and implication in HIV-1 dissemination.,Dumais  Nancy,"Dumais, Nancy",Universit&eacute; de Sherbrooke,Qu&eacute;bec,Canada,200809,267126.0,Operating Grant,Operating Grants,Biomedical,Infection and Immunity,Cell Migration; Chemokines And Cytokines; Hiv-1; Mucosal Transmission; Prostaglandins,"After initial entry of the human immunodeficiency virus (HIV), replication of the virus first occurs at the site of infection. Then the major site of replication quickly shifts to lymphoid tissues of the body, including those in lymph nodes, spleen, liver, and bone marrow. Since macrophages are important both as reservoirs and vectors for the spread of HIV in the body, the main objective of the current proposal is to determine the cell surface molecule responsible for the migration of infected monocytes/macrophages. Our preliminary results indicate that expression and functionality of CCR7, a chemokine receptor, are up-regulated in monocytes in the presence of PGE2, a pro-inflammatory molecule. This research project is designed to gain novel insights on CCR7 at the molecular, cellular and animal levels. In the first objective, we will characterize CCR7 expression by PGE2 in macrophages. In vivo and in vitro models will be used to determine the impact of HIV-1 infection on CCR7 expression in monocytes and in macrophages. The data resulting from our investigations will serve to develop strategies to stop HIV dissemination.",3 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=171256&lang=en
171266,Neural Mechanisms of Orofacial Function,Sessle  Barry J,"Sessle, Barry J",University of Toronto,Ontario,Canada,200809,841273.0,Operating Grant,Operating Grants,Biomedical,Musculoskeletal Health and Arthritis,Microstimulation; Neuron Recording; Orofacial Motor Control; Pain; Plasticity; Sensorimotor Cortex,"Our studies will help clarify the role of the cerebral cortex in adaptive mechanisms associated with an altered oral environment and the learning of new motor skills, and thus provide new insights into better rehabilitative strategies to exploit these cortical mechanisms. The studies employ microstimulation and nerve cell recordings in the sensorimotor area of the cerebral cortex representing orofacial sensory and motor functions in animals. We have already documented several properties of this face sensorimotor cortex, and also shown the critical role played by this cortical region in the control of orofacial movements that is dependent on orofacial sensory inputs into the brain, thus providing a scientific underpinning why cortical damage (e.g. from a stroke) can severely impair orofacial sensory and motor functions. We have also revealed the neuroplasticity of the cortical region associated with the animal's learning of a new orofacial motor skill, suggesting this cortical region is also vital for motor learning, consistent with our analogous findings in humans. We have in addition documented in animals that cortical plasticity occurs also following nerve injury or acute pain in the tongue and following changes to the teeth (alterations to the dental occlusion, i.e. the 'bite' of the teeth; or tooth extraction). We now plan to test if neuroplasticity occurs in the sensorimotor cortex in other orofacial conditions, such as a chronic pain state, and determine the contribution of certain brainstem regions to this neuroplasticity. We will also test if changes occur in the properties of nerve cells of the sensorimotor cortex in these conditions, and also as the animal learns the new orofacial motor skill. Such studies are fundamental for understanding how humans learn and acquire a new skill and how they adapt or not to an altered oral environment, and for the development of improved clinical approaches aimed at restoring oral function.",5 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=171266&lang=en
171268,Autophagic Regulation of Memory T Cell Survival,Lum  Julian J,"Lum, Julian J","BC Cancer, part of PHSA (Victoria)",British Columbia,Canada,200809,300000.0,CIHR New Investigator,Salary Programs,Biomedical,Infection and Immunity,Autophagy; Cell Death; Hypoxia; Immune Response; Lcmv; Memory T Cells,"During an encounter with a foreign pathogen such as a virus or bacterium, the immune system responds by generating a large number of specialized ""T cells"" to seek and destroy the invading pathogen.  When the infectious microbe is eliminated the majority of T cells undergo cell death and this contraction is a means to restore normal T cell homeostasis.  However, a small proportion of T cells are able survive and transform into distinct cells termed memory T cells.  The end product of this process is the generation of ""immunological memory"" and represents the foundation to life-long immunity to the pathogen.  One important but unresolved question is how are these memory T cells maintained for the lifespan of the host?  This is an essential consideration because the generation of memory T cells is the basis for our success in all human vaccinations and a major goal in developing vaccines for diseases such as HIV/AIDS and cancer.  Based on initial laboratory experiments, we have uncovered a process called autophagy which is involved in promoting cell survival when cells are exposed to low oxygen.  Our results also demonstrate that memory T cells exhibit features that are characteristic of autophagy.  Therefore, the proposed research will use a well established lymphocytic choriomeningitis virus (LCMV) model to investigate how T cells survive this pathogenic infection, and ultimately develop long-term immunity.  In Aim 1, we will use immunological and genetic approaches to test whether autophagy is necessary for the development of memory T cells during LCMV infection.  In Aim 2, we will define how low oxygen can activate the autophagy survival pathway.  This information can be used in the future to provide molecular insight into survival of other types of long-lived cells such as cancer stem cells and to design immune-based treatments to destroy these cells.",5 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=171268&lang=en
171272,Nitric oxide-mediated inhibition of hypoxia-induced immune escape in cancer,Graham  Charles H,"Graham, Charles H","Queen's University (Kingston, Ontario)",Ontario,Canada,200809,529669.0,Operating Grant,Operating Grants,Biomedical,Cancer Research,Cancer; Cell Biology; Hypoxia; Immune Escape; Immunology; Nitric Oxide,"Our immune system can eliminate cancer as it develops. However, due to reasons not fully understood, some cancers develop ways to avoid elimination by 'killer' cells of our immune system called natural killer or NK cells (immune escape). As tumours grow, their supply of oxygen can't adequately reach all layers of the rapidly increasing tumour cell population. Consequently, tumours develop poorly oxygenated or hypoxic regions. We hypothesize that hypoxia contributes to immune escape in cancer. We have already shown that when tumour cells are exposed to hypoxia they shed a protein (MICA) that normally flags them for elimination by NK cells. We now propose to characterise in detail the mechanism responsible for the shedding of MICA from tumour cells when they are exposed to hypoxia, as this mechanism is also responsible for immune escape.

When cancer cells are exposed to severe hypoxia they can't produce the molecule nitric oxide (NO). We showed that when NO is not produced, as when the oxygen supply is limited, tumour cells acquire aggressive properties such as increased ability to spread and increased resistance to anti-cancer drugs. We recently discovered that the ability of tumour cells to shed MICA and evade destruction by NK cells when exposed to hypoxia is also due to decreased NO production. This is a key finding because we can now interfere with the effect of hypoxia on immune escape by introducing NO activity in the form of drugs that release or mimic NO. Our proposed studies will determine which step of the mechanism of immune escape NO regulates.

To reach our goals, we will use cell culture and animal models, as well as pharmacological, biochemical, immunological, and molecular methods. The outcomes will increase our understanding of how cancers evade immune destruction and will likely have translational value, as re-introduction of NO activity in cancer cells may be used to enhance immunotherapy, or may even be an effective 'stand-alone' therapy.",3 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=171272&lang=en
171279,Identification and characterization of protein partners of the Merlin tumour suppressor,Hughes  Sarah C,"Hughes, Sarah C",University of Alberta,Alberta,Canada,200809,665365.0,Operating Grant,Operating Grants,Biomedical,Genetics,Cell Polarity; Cell Proliferation; Post-Transcriptional Regulation; Tumor Suppressor,"Cancer is a disease where the normal controls regulating cell division are no longer active. Cells are controlled by their genes, and one class, termed tumour suppressors, encode 'do not divide' signals. When these are inhibited, excess cell division occurs which manifests as a tumour. Another important feature in multi-cell animals are the signal that tell cells to stick together. A progression to cell metastasis occurs when the signals for ""cells stick together"" and cell ""do not divide"" are mis-regulated.  Our proposal focuses on the tumour suppressor Merlin. Loss of Merlin activity leads to tumours within the brain and spinal cord. How Merlin tells cells ""do not divide"" is not understood.  We are using the long history of Drosophila genetics to identify proteins that interact with Merlin to help Merlin carry out its tumour suppressor functions. We have identified and will further characterize several proteins called Moesin, Sip1 and Slik. Moesin is required to control signal to tell cells to stick together Sip1 is a scaffold protein that interacts with Merlin and Moesin to control cell growth and to keep cells ""sticking together""  We propose that Merlin is part of a large complex of proteins that help Merlin control how cells grow and when to stick together. Our ultimate goal is to understand how Merlin acts as a tumour suppressor to aid in diagnosis and therapy of Neurofibromatosis Type 2 tumours.",5 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=171279&lang=en
171291,Gender differences in cerebral laterality,Sullivan  Ronald,"Sullivan, Ronald",Centre de recherche Institut universitaire en sant&eacute; mentale de Montr&eacute;al,Qu&eacute;bec,Canada,200809,286530.0,Operating Grant,Operating Grants,Biomedical,"Neurosciences, Mental Health and Addiction",Anxiety/Depression; Cerebral Asymmetry; Corticolimbic Function; Gender Differences; Monoamines; Stress,"Stress-related psychiatric disorders like depression and anxiety are approximately twice as prevalent in women as men, yet the reasons for this discrepancy are not clear. The anatomical and neurochemical systems in the brain which are very important in regulating stress and emotion processing, differ in many ways in males and females. One important difference is the way in which these structures and systems are lateralized (in terms of left/right hemispheric specialization), which can be opposite in the two sexes. This proposal examines these gender differences in brain laterality and attempts to demonstrate how such differences are related to the ability to respond to and cope with stress. By following up on a number of highly relevant findings in rodents, various technical approaches will be employed including behavioural analysis, measures of neurotransmitter levels and release in response to stress and the differential effects of brain lesions in males and females. It is hoped that by better understanding gender differences in how specific  brain regions and systems are functionally lateralized, that we may someday be better equipped to treat these devastating disorders with more effective and gender-specific treatments.",3 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=171291&lang=en
171295,Y-family polymerases and co-factors in translesion DNA replication and mutagenesis,Ling  Hong,"Ling, Hong",Western University (Ontario),Ontario,Canada,200809,633680.0,Operating Grant,Operating Grants,Biomedical,Genetics,Cancer; Carcinogenesis; Chromotography; Dna Damage; Dna Replication; X-Ray Crystallography,"Maintenance of genomic stability is a challenge to every cell in the presence of genotoxic agents. Translesion DNA replication or translesion synthesis (TLS), the replication of DNA across damaged DNA, is essential for a cell to survive DNA damage. Numerous cellular and environmental agents continuously damage DNA. DNA damage or lesions blocks or slows down DNA replication, threatening the survival of cells. DNA polymerases (pol) are the molecules responsible to replicate DNA in cells. Only specialized DNA polymerases are able to replicate through damaged DNA. These translesional polymerases (pol) are mutational, introducing errors as they replicate DNA. Consequently, the specialized DNA polymerases mainly determine the mutagenic potential of DNA lesions. These errors in DNA are associated with aging and human diseases, including various forms of cancer. Due to their mutagenic potential, Y-family polymerase activities must be tightly regulated. The regulation is carried by certain protein cofactors. One of these protein-partners is the sliding clamp protein, named PCNAs. This study focuses on structure-function studies of translesion and error-prone DNA polymerases, and their functionally related proteins PCNAs. The goal is to understand why the specialized DNA polymerases make errors and how their function being controlled by the protein-partners. The main technique we use is X-ray crystallography to determine 3-dimensional structures of Y-polymerases, PCNAs and Pol-PCNA complexes.  The studies will help us to learn how DNA damage can result in mutations in the human genes, and the role of these events in the onset of diseases.",5 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=171295&lang=en
171297,Functional selectivity at the post-endocytic sorting of heptahelical receptors: focus on delta opioid receptor (DOR) recycling.,Pineyro  Graciela,"Pineyro, Graciela",Centre de recherche Institut universitaire en sant&eacute; mentale de Montr&eacute;al,Qu&eacute;bec,Canada,200809,567945.0,Operating Grant,Operating Grants,Biomedical,"Neurosciences, Mental Health and Addiction",Desensitization/Tolerance; G Protein; Ligand-Specific Receptor States; Neuronal Cultures; Opioid Receptor; Post-Endocytic Sorting (Recycling),"Heptahelical receptors are the target for more than 50% of currently available therapeutic aagents. These receptors are specialized membrane proteins that allow to convey information from the extracellular to intracellular space by undergoing conformational changes upon ligand binding. The present proposal focuses on opioid receptors, their endogenous and exogenous ligands. Exogenous ligands for delta opioid receptors (DORs) are potentially powerful analgesics, but their major drawback is rapid development of tolerance. An important detereminant of tolerance is a decrease in receptor ability to generate a signal upon sustained activation, a process known as desensitization. We have recently shown that different DOR ligands stabilize different receptor conformations with distinct desensitization properties. The purpose of this study is to understand what makes some ligands produce more desensitization (and consequently more tolerance) than others. By doing so we expect to validate the general notion that it is possible to produce ligands that are capable of stimulating receptor signalling while avoiding rapid desensitization. This knowledge should be applicable not only in the production of analgesics with reduced tolerance but for the development of longer acting therapeutic agents acting at different heptahelical receptors.",5 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=171297&lang=en
171317,Loss of Estrogen Receptor beta activity results in dysregulation of follicular extracellular matrix composition,Deroo  Bonnie J,"Deroo, Bonnie J",Western University (Ontario),Ontario,Canada,200809,619087.0,Operating Grant,Operating Grants,Biomedical,"Human Development, Child and Youth Health",Estrogen; Estrogen Receptor; Extracellular Matrix; Folliculogenesis; Granulosa Cell; Ovary,"The most common cause of infertility in women is impaired ovulation, and although few genetic causes of infertility are known, a genetic basis for infertility is suspected. Genes associated with the production of a healthy egg are likely candidates for female infertility because many carefully-timed signals from both the brain and the ovary are required for the production of a healthy egg. Although it is well known that estrogen is produced by a woman's ovary, it is less well known that the ovary itself requires estrogen for proper function. Estrogen is required by the ovary for the production and release of a healthy fertilizable egg, and in mice, lack of estrogen results in reduced fertility. Our goal is to understand the role of estrogen within the ovary, and the mechanisms by which estrogen regulates ovarian function. To pursue this goal, we study mice that are unable to respond to estrogen because they lack a specific protein, Estrogen Receptor Beta, which is expressed in the ovary more than anywhere else in the body. These mice are less fertile because they do not ovulate well: eggs cannot be released, or ovulated, but are ""stuck"" within the ovary. By studying these infertile mice, we can better understand why estrogen is required for ovulation. Understanding the role of estrogen in ovulation may provide genetic clues to the basis of some cases of infertility in women.",5 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=171317&lang=en
171323,Pharmacogenomics of human UDP-glucuronosyltransferases:  From single genetic polymorphisms to a complex regulation of enzyme activity.,Guillemette  Chantal,"Guillemette, Chantal",Universit&eacute; Laval,Qu&eacute;bec,Canada,200809,810494.0,Operating Grant,Operating Grants,Biomedical,Cancer Research,Drug Metabolism; Phase Ii; Udp-Glucuronosyltransferases,"Glucuronosyltransferase (UGT) enzymes are responsible for the glucuronidation metabolic pathway and play an essential role in the elimination and detoxification of a large diversity of drugs from all classes, accounting for ~35% of drug conjugation. In human, UGT super-family is subdivided in two families (UGT1 and UGT2) and are encoded by highly polymorphic loci. This proposal aims to pursue and further expand our previous findings concerning the relationship between genetic variations in a UGT gene and response to an anticancer drug. The proposed study will generate important information regarding patients treated in Canada and this has never been tested before and are necessary to establish the value of prospective genotyping with anticancer drug therapy by health care providers in Canada. 
On the other hand, while most pharmacogenomic studies solely focus on DNA sequence variations, we propose to study the regulation of UGT activity by epigenomic (e.g. CpG methylation and histone deacetylation) and post-transcriptional (e.g. mRNA splicing) events. We believe that the study of classical single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) to epigenomic and new splicing events is critical for a better understanding underlying interindividual variations in xeno- and endobiotic glucuronidation by human UGT enzymes and to fully appreciate their in vivo significance, particularly in drug response. We intend to highlight those new mechanisms that create diversity and variability in this important metabolic pathway. This proposal unites many innovative aspects while using a multiple approach from bench to a clinical investigation.",5 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=171323&lang=en
171325,Neuronal functions of the ATRX mental retardation gene.,B&eacute;rub&eacute;  Nathalie G,"Bérubé, Nathalie G",Western University (Ontario),Ontario,Canada,200809,785991.0,Operating Grant,Operating Grants,Biomedical,Genetics,Chromatin Remodeling; Cognitive Disabilities; Mitosis; Nervous System; Neuronal Death; Progenitor Division,"The central nervous system is generated from very few neurons (nerve cells) and attaining normal size and cell type diversity of this system requires tight control of how cells divide. Mutations in the ATRX gene cause mental retardation in humans, but it is not known why this occurs or what the normal function of ATRX in the brain is. We have shown that the absence of ATRX protein in the brain of mice causes a reduction in the number of neurons and consequently a smaller brain. We have also determined that ATRX is required for the division of neural cells into two daughter cells, a process called mitosis.  We propose to investigate the causes and outcomes of defective mitosis in the developing brain of mice that lack the ATRX protein. This work will provide exciting new insights into the cause of learning disabilities that result from ATRX gene mutations in humans as well as contribute to a greater understanding of brain development in general.",5 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=171325&lang=en
171347,Analysis of the B-cell Lymphoma-9/Pygopus Protein complex in vertebrate body axis development,Kao  Kenneth R,"Kao, Kenneth R",Memorial University of Newfoundland,Newfoundland and Labrador,Canada,200809,462138.0,Operating Grant,Operating Grants,Biomedical,"Human Development, Child and Youth Health",Experimental Embryology; Gene Expression Analysis; Transcriptional Regulation; Translational Control Of Maternal Mrna,"The penetration of the sperm cell into the dormant egg triggers the remarkable program of events that turns the egg into a miniature but living model of the adult, called an embryo. While surface observation might indicate a slow, plodding course of minute changes, if one were to peer into the activities of the cells, one would see extremely busy things taking place - small hormone like molecules being exchanged between cells, genetic information being duplicated and ""read"" by gene transcription machines that are used to make the building blocks of cells, as well as hundreds of thousands - indeed millions of other parallel processes occurring simultaneously. Our research is directed towards understanding one gene transcription machine called BCL-9/pygo. We are determining how this important molecular structure controls and is controlled to generate a bilaterally symmetric body, from a spherical egg.",5 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=171347&lang=en
171356,The human amylin receptor as a target for the actions of amyloid-beta protein in the brain.,Jhamandas  Jack H,"Jhamandas, Jack H",University of Alberta,Alberta,Canada,200809,839637.0,Operating Grant,Operating Grants,Biomedical,Aging,Alzheimer'S Disease; Amylin; Amyloid Peptides; Apoptosis; Cellular Neurophysiology; Human Neurons/Transgenics,"In Alzheimer's disease (AD), a loss of brain cells in key brain areas is linked to memory and cognitive deficits observed in this condition.  The deposition of amyloid-beta protein in the brain is a primary pathological feature of AD and it is believed that this peptide is highly neurotoxic to brain cells. Animals that are genetically engineered to over-express this protein within the brain show behavioural deficits and changes in brain architecture that mimic the human condition of AD.  Work from our laboratory has shown that compounds, which block the amylin receptor in the brain, can protect rat brain cells from toxicity caused by amyloid-beta protein.  This raises the possibility of whether a strategy of blocking amylin receptor to protect nerve cells from amyloid-beta protein can also work in human brain cells.  It is important to address this question in human brain cells, since unlike people, normally aging mice and rats do not develop an AD-like condition.  In this proposal we use human brain cells, that we can grow and maintain in the dish, to determine whether compounds that block the amylin receptor can protect human nerve cells exposed to amyloid-beta protein. We will examine whether amylin receptors are increased in genetically engineered mice that over-express amyloid-beta protein in the brain and in post-mortem brain tissue from Alzheimer's patients.  Finally, we will treat the amyloid over-expressing mice with amylin receptor compounds and ascertain whether it is possible to prevent development of behavioural deficits in these animals.
At present there is no treatment for AD other than for its symptoms.  Studies such as those contained in this proposal may identify newer therapies based on protecting nerve cells from the deleterious effects of  amyloid-beta in the brains of AD patients and thus slowing or preventing the disease altogether.",5 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=171356&lang=en
171357,Regulation of skeletal muscle metabolism by adiponectin,Sweeney  Gary,"Sweeney, Gary","York University (Toronto, Ontario)",Ontario,Canada,200809,504405.0,Operating Grant,Operating Grants,Biomedical,"Nutrition, Metabolism and Diabetes",Adiponectin; Diabetes; Fatty Acid Uptake And Metabolism; Glucose Transport And Metabolism; Insulin; Obesity,"The current obesity epidemic is responsible for an increased incidence and decreased age of onset of type 2 (insulin-resistant) diabetes. It is therefore imperative to understand the mechanisms responsible for the development of insulin resistance in obesity. It was once thought that adipose (fat) cells simply store excess fat. Importantly, work in recent years has indicated that fat cells also make and secrete a range of substances that can travel in the bloodstream to affect other parts of the body. These substances have now been shown to play a role in controlling blood glucose levels. Specifically, here we will further investigate the ability of adiponectin to regulate glucose uptake and metabolism in skeletal muscle cells, a major target tissue of insulin action. We are only now beginning to understand the events stimulated by adiponectin to occur inside muscle cells which control the use of glucose and fatty acids. It is anticipated that development of results arising from this work may potentially yield new therapies to prevent or treat diabetes and its associated complications.",5 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=171357&lang=en
171359,Impact of MEDLINE filters on evidence retrieval,Garg  Amit,"Garg, Amit",London Health Sciences Centre Res. Inc. (Ont.),Ontario,Canada,200809,85142.0,Operating Grant,Operating Grants,Health systems / services,Health Services and Policy Research,Database Evaluation; Evidence-Based Medicine; Information Retrieval; Medline Searching; Nephrology; Renal Informatics,"Health-care workers often search the MEDLINE database for journal articles to keep up with the latest advances in medicine. MEDLINE, which is freely available online through the PubMed service (www.pubmed.gov), is the largest database in the world for medical information and currently has records on over 16 million scientific articles. However, because the database is so large, finding the right information can be frustrating and time-consuming; a search often returns articles that aren't relevant to the clinical problem, and important articles that should be found are often missed. One way to improve these results is to search using a filter that weeds-out unwanted information, leaving a higher concentration of relevant articles. This method is known as filtering the database. We have previously created three types of filters to use in MEDLINE. The first filters identify clinical research that meets quality standards. These filters are now part of the PubMed service and are widely used by the medical community. The second filters find information related to nephrology (the care of patients with kidney disorders) and the third filters limit the database to journals that publish nephrology information. We will now test these filters by applying them to real searches created by doctors to answer clinical questions related to kidney patient care. We will compare the use of the filters to the clinician's own, unaided search. If we show that these filters produce improved results, we can make them available online to health professionals around the world and educate them on their use. Using our example, filters can be created and tested for other medical disciplines such as cardiology and cancer care. We expect helping health professionals keep up-to-date with the latest advances will improve the transfer of research into practice, medical decision-making and patient care.",1 yr 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=171359&lang=en
171361,Investigating the genetic interaction between aging and proteotoxicity in neurodegeneration,Parker  Alex J,"Parker, Alex J",Universit&eacute; de Montr&eacute;al,Qu&eacute;bec,Canada,200809,300000.0,CIHR New Investigator,Salary Programs,Biomedical,Aging,Aging; Genetics; Neurodegeneration; Therapeutic Targets; Trinucleotide Repeat Disease,"As we live longer than ever before the World Health Organization predicts that neurodegenerative diseases like Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis, Alzheimer's, Huntington's and Parkinson's diseases will surpass cancer as the second leading cause of death in Canada by 2040. I am interested in finding neuronal survival mechanisms that reduce or prevent age-related nervous system decline from disease-associated proteins.
Aging may be the unifying risk factor in nearly all neurodegenerative diseases. The discovery that single gene mutations can dramatically increase cell survival and delay aging in simple animals revealed that longevity has a genetic component. I hypothesize that these longevity genes may modify disease progression in humans, and that these genes may be new drug targets. The path from genetic mutation to neuronal decline is complex and takes decades in humans. By using simple models that recapitulate aspects of human disease it is possible to address my hypothesis. I have pioneered the use of the worm Caenorhabditis elegans to model neurodegeneration. I propose to establish new models and use them to explore the genetic pathways that protect against age-related neurodegeneration. The expected results are advances in understanding the relationships between longevity and cell survival pathways, which may reveal pharmaceutical targets or markers of disease progression. Finally, this work may uncover cell survival mechanisms applicable to other neurodegenerative diseases.",5 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=171361&lang=en
171365,"Realities, Expectations and Attitudes to Life Support Technologies in Intensive Care for Octogenarians: The REALISTIC 80",Heyland  Daren K,"Heyland, Daren K","Queen's University (Kingston, Ontario)",Ontario,Canada,200809,800444.0,Operating Grant,Operating Grants,Clinical,Circulatory and Respiratory Health,Aging; Clinical Decision Making; Outcomes Research; Quality Of Care; Quality Of Life; Satisfaction,"Every day in hospitals across Canada, frail elderly patients at or near the end of life are faced with decisions related to the use of life support machines. In a recent survey carried out at several large teaching hospitals across the country, seriously ill patients rated ""not being prolonged on life supports"" as the most important element in good quality care at the end of life. However, this same group of patients appeared to be quite poorly informed about their treatment options at the end of life. 

To make an informed choice about the use of life supports at the end of life, patients and their families need to know what can happen over the long term should they choose to go to an intensive care unit and have life supports applied. Long-term outcomes are currently unknown despite their obvious importance to decision making. The purpose of this study is to describe the 12-month survival and quality of life of patients following critical illness and learn the family caregivers' perspective on the quality of care provided.

We anticipate that 800 patients and families being cared for at 20 intensive care units across Canada will contribute to this research project. The information gained will prove invaluable not only to patients and their families but also to their doctors and all health care professionals, who need to better understand the perspectives of those for whom they provide care.",3 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=171365&lang=en
171368,Intervention to improve colorectal cancer screening rates,Sewitch  Maida J,"Sewitch, Maida J",Research Institute of the McGill University Health Centre,Qu&eacute;bec,Canada,200809,181173.0,Operating Grant,Operating Grants,Health systems / services,Health Services and Policy Research,Aging; Colorectal Cancer; Intervention; Pilot; Screening; Telehealth,"Despite widespread distribution of colorectal cancer (CRC) screening guidelines, many Canadians are not screened for CRC. Our research shows that in 2003 only 30% of Canadians received CRC screening according to recommendations. Telehealth, a novel approach to health service delivery, may be an improvement strategy that overcomes common barriers to primary care physician delivery of CRC screening referrals. A 24-month telehealth intervention pilot study is proposed. Participants will be primary care patients who are aged 50-74 years; without previous or current CRC, colon polyps, inflammatory bowel disease or bowel symptoms; and registered in the hospital appointment system database. The primary study objective is to test the feasibility of study methods for a future randomized trial aimed at evaluating the effectiveness of a call-in center on improving CRC screening rates in primary care patients.  Feasibility will be assessed using the following indicators: 1) the proportions of invited primary care patients who contact the call-in center, select stool testing and return the completed stool test kit; 2) the average time interval between CRC screening invitation issuing and call-in center contact; 3) the proportion of positive stool tests found; and 4) the proportion of patients with positive stool tests who are referred to gastroenterology or colorectal surgery and/or receive follow-up tests.  We will also ascertain the reasons for: non-response to contacting the call-in center, non-adherence to stool test screening, and participation in stool test screening using qualitative data collection and analysis. This study will evaluate a new method of delivering preventive health care to Canadians that may be used in provincial CRC screening programs.",2 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=171368&lang=en
171371,Neurobiology of resilience and vulnerability to chronic stress: Involvement of endogenous opioid circuitry,Drolet  Guy,"Drolet, Guy",Universit&eacute; Laval,Qu&eacute;bec,Canada,200809,701495.0,Operating Grant,Operating Grants,Biomedical,"Neurosciences, Mental Health and Addiction",Adaptation To Stress; Anxiety; Depression; Functional Neuroanatomy; Resilience; Rna Interference,"These experiments will help unravel the organization of opioid neuronal systems related to the stress response, and their role in adaptation to chronic stress. The relevance of the role(s) played by enkephalin and dynorphin in adaptation to stress may be critical in the etiology and pathology of physiological or psychiatric disorders associated with repeated or prolonged stress, such as affective and anxiety disorders.",5 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=171371&lang=en
171377,Group II intron retroelements in bacteria,Zimmerly  Steven J,"Zimmerly, Steven J",University of Calgary,Alberta,Canada,200809,387135.0,Operating Grant,Operating Grants,Biomedical,Genetics,Bacteria; Group Ii Intron; Retroelement; Reverse Transcriptase; Ribozyme; Rna,"Group II introns are a type of mobile DNA consisting of a self-splicing RNA and a reverse transcriptase (RT). Group II introns are found across the bacterial kingdom, including in many pathogens. Previously, our laboratory identified and classified the varieties of group II introns in bacteria, and identified a surprising diversity of structural forms and inferred mobility behaviors. The most distinctive intron type is ""bacterial class C,"" as these introns insert directly after transcriptional terminator motifs. We have biochemically determined that during an intron insertion reaction in vitro for the B.h.I1 intron of Bacillus halodurans, the DNA target is recognized as a hairpin; however, the in vivo source for the unwound DNA hairpin is unknown.

Here, we propose to further explore the diversity of group II introns, both on the global level and for two cases of specialized introns.
1) We will continue database mining to identify, classify and analyze group II introns across bacteria, and the information will be made public on our web site database (www.fw.ucalgary.ca/group2introns/). 
2) We will continue investigating the mobility properties of the B.h.I1 intron in vitro by determining the protein binding site on the intron RNA, and by probing how the DNA hairpin of the target is recognized. Additional in vivo studies will examine how the mobility mechanisms intersect with the cellular processes of transcription, transcriptional termination, and DNA replication. 
3) We will characterize a novel group II intron derivative that exhibits alternative splicing in vivo. The intron Cl.t.I1 of Clostridium tetanus produces four alternatively spliced forms of a surface layer protein. We will address whether alternative splicing is regulated and how the intron chooses among the different 3' splice sites.

Together, these investigations will advance our understanding of group II introns in bacteria, and help to infer how a selfish DNA has adapted over time.",5 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=171377&lang=en
171392,Specificity and Function of Ly49 Natural Killer Cell Receptors,Kane  Kevin P,"Kane, Kevin P",University of Alberta,Alberta,Canada,200809,668730.0,Operating Grant,Operating Grants,Biomedical,Infection and Immunity,Molecular Modeling; Mutagenesis; Natural Killer Cells; Protein Structure; Receptors; Transfection,"Natural killer (NK) cells play a vital role in virus infection to slow the spread of virus in the body and production of virus by infected cells, until other components of the immune system can become operative and aid the fight against the virus. Natural killer cells recognize and destroy cells infected with virus preventing these cells from becoming virus factories. Remarkably, NK cells can rapidly discriminate between healthy cells and virus infected cells. We are studying a class of cell surface receptors that enable NK cells to distinguish healthy cells from altered or virus infected cells. The present study is designed to determine how these receptors bind molecules expressed on other cells which alert NK cells to the health status of the cells and how on a molecular and mechanistic level this recognition results in changes in the behaviour of the NK cell to either destroy or spare the cell in contact. Understanding these principles, will allow for knowledge-based manipulation of NK cells to better combat virus infection.",5 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=171392&lang=en
171394,Hypothalamic regulation of adipocytes and peripheral insulin sensitivity,Woo  Minna N,"Woo, Minna N",Ontario Cancer Institute (Toronto),Ontario,Canada,200809,605830.0,Operating Grant,Operating Grants,Biomedical,"Nutrition, Metabolism and Diabetes",Adipocyte; Cre-Loxp; High Fat Diet; Insulin Resistance; Knockout Mice; Obesity,"The worldwide increase in type 2 diabetes from 30 million to 171 million between 1985 and 2000 have far surpassed the estimated forecast.  Type 2 diabetes is the leading cause of heart and kidney failure as well as blindness.  Our current treatment is unable to stop the disease progression.

A condition known as insulin resistance is an early finding in type 2 diabetes.  It is clinically silent; therefore patients can go for years without being diagnosed.  Our current understanding of how insulin resistance develops is poor.  Finding strategies to prevent the onset of insulin resistance can potentially cure diabetes and eliminate heart and kidney diseases.  

We have recently identified specific cells within the hypothalamus which can prevent the development of insulin resistance.  In our proposal, we wish to 1) further understand what occurs within these unique brain cells in the hypothalamus which control the fat tissue, 2) find what effect these important brain cells have on other organs that are important in diabetes development, such as the muscle and liver, and 3) identify which particular hormones secreted by the fat tissues are important in controlling whole body insulin resistance state.  Results from our experiments can provide new strategies for a potential cure of diabetes.",5 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=171394&lang=en
171411,Pannexins as a novel growth regulator in gliomas,Naus  Christian C,"Naus, Christian C",University of British Columbia,British Columbia,Canada,200809,645690.0,Operating Grant,Operating Grants,Biomedical,Cancer Research,Cancer; Intercellular Communication; Molecular Biology; Pannexins,"Gap junctions are traditionally made up of connexins subunits that form a pore allowing communication to occur between
two adjacent cells. Recently a new family of gap junction-like protein called pannexins has been identified. Like connexins,
pannexins appear to reduce cell growth. Unlike connexins that preferentially form an intercellular pore, pannexins form large
single channels (hemichannels) that are able to connect the interior of the cell directly to the outside environment. We will
determine whether pannexins mediate their growth inhibitory function via hemichannel activity, or whether they utilize similar
mechanisms as conventional connexins. Understanding how pannexins control cell growth could open up alternative avenues for diagnosis or treatment in cancer.",5 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=171411&lang=en
171414,Role of Lipids and Lipoproteins in Modifying the Biological Activity of Hydrophobic Drugs,Wasan  Kishor M,"Wasan, Kishor M",University of British Columbia,British Columbia,Canada,200809,300000.0,Chair: CIHR/SME Collaborative Research Program,Salary Programs,Biomedical,Infection and Immunity,Amphotericin B; Fungal Infections; High Pressure Liquid Chromatography; Lipid And Lipoprotein Metabolism; Lipid-Based Drug Delivery; Lymphatic Drug Transport; Pharmacokinetics; Ultracentrifugation,"The plasma lipoprotein distribution of potential drug candidates is not commonly studied. For some hydrophobic drug candidates, attainment of similar plasma free drug levels has not been associated with uniform production of pharmacological activity in different animal species. It is well known that plasma lipoprotein lipid profiles vary considerably between different animal species. In addition, human disease states can significantly influence plasma lipoprotein profiles, resulting in altered drug therapeutic outcomes. A plausible explanation for these findings may be a result of lipoprotein drug transport within the systemic circulation. Elucidation of the mechanisms that dictate the lipoprotein binding of drugs may yield valuable insight into the factors governing the pharmacological activity and potential toxicity of these compounds. Furthermore, utilizing these factors to target compounds specifically to one lipoprotein subclass over another potentially could improve the drug's efficacy and safety.",4 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=171414&lang=en
171429,Modulation of vascular smooth muscle cell phenotype,Zahradka  Peter,"Zahradka, Peter",University of Manitoba,Manitoba,Canada,200809,314235.0,Operating Grant,Operating Grants,Biomedical,Circulatory and Respiratory Health,Cell Culture; Cell Cycle; Dominant-Negative Mutants; Restenosis; Signal Transduction; Vascular Smooth Muscle,"When arteries fill with lipid because of atherosclerotic disease, blood flow can becomes severely restricted. In the case of the heart, this can lead to a heart attack. If these lipid-filled lesions are detected before a heart attack occurs, blood flow can be restored by either angioplasty (also insertion of a stent into the artery) or by bypass graft surgery. In both cases, the vessel is physically injured during the procedure. Just like a cut to the skin, an exaggerated scar can form, and this will block blood flow as badly as the original lesion. Formation of this second lesion in response to injury is called restenosis. This lab has been studying the problem of restenosis, with the aim of identifying specific processes that affect the lesion size, for several years. We have found that two hormones (angiotensin II and platelet-derived growth factor) released by the artery itself or platelets that bind to the site of damage have a significant impact on restenosis. Our studies have also found a common mediator for signals originating from these hormones. Our intention is to further characterize the mechanism by which this mediator, termed cyclic AMP response element binding protein or CREB, operates. A particular emphasis for our studies will be the connection between angiotensin II and protein kinase A, which we believe to be the primary activator of CREB. We anticipate that completing this investigation will give us more information to identify methods capable of preventing restenosis and thus prolonging the health of these individuals.",3 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=171429&lang=en
171430,Ultrasound-targeted gene therapy for heart failure,Leong-Poi  Howard M,"Leong-Poi, Howard M",Unity Health Toronto,Ontario,Canada,200809,662450.0,Operating Grant,Operating Grants,Biomedical,Circulatory and Respiratory Health,Chronic Ischemia; Gene Delivery; Heart Failure; Progenitor Cells; Targeted Microbubbles; Therapeutic Angiogenesis,"Despite advances in medical and surgical therapies, the morbidity and mortality of patients with chronic coronary artery disease and heart failure remains high. For patients who fail to improve with conventional treatments and whose heart function continues to deteriorate, novel therapies to improve cardiac pumping function are needed. Promising new techniques involves either genes, or special cells called ""progenitor"" cells. These cells are derived from the blood or bone-marrow, and have the ability to develop into new vessels or heart muscle cells. We have developed novel ultrasound techniques using microbubbles that can be targeted to the heart, and can be used to deliver gene or cell therapy, without the use of direct injections. A non-invasive means of delivery would facilitate an easy and safe method for repeated delivery in patients. This present research, if successful, will lead to a non-invasive method of delivering novel treatments to promote new vessel formation, limit heart muscle death and improve cardiac function in patients with severe symptomatic heart failure.",5 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=171430&lang=en
171432,The Role of Vitamins Consumed During Pregnancy by the Wistar Rat in the Development of Food Intake and Metabolic Regulation of the Offspring,Anderson  Gerald H,"Anderson, Gerald H",University of Toronto,Ontario,Canada,200809,384711.0,Operating Grant,Operating Grants,Biomedical,"Nutrition, Metabolism and Diabetes",Epigenetics; Food Intake Regulation; Metabolic  Disease; Nutrients And Fetal Programming; Rats; Vitamins,"Overweight and obesity are characteristics of over one-half of the adult population in Canada and of 20-25% of children. The origins of the problem are many and complex. However the focus of this research is on the mother's diet, specifically the vitamin component.
Concurrent with the obesity epidemic has been the increased use of multivitamins during pregnancy and, in the US and partially in Canada, the appearance of many food products that reflect a liberal discretionary fortification policy.  It is known that vitamins play an active role during development in determining the expression of genes.  Thus while they do not determine the genome they affect the phenotype associated with the genome of the baby.  Our hypothesis is that vitamin consumption during pregnancy, in both excess and inadequate amounts, programs the fetus for obesity and metabolic disease in later life, even though both mother and the baby are judged to be well-nourished. Specifically we hypothesize that disruption of the development of the brain's food intake regulatory system in utero determines the outcome. The hypothesis is being tested in a rat model. 

Our work has potential to lead to a new understanding of the role of vitamins in development of regulatory systems for food intake and metabolism. The results may provide a foundation for investigations of the effect of both inadequate and excess intakes of vitamins and other bioactive supplements during pregnancy on programming for chronic diseases in later life in humans.",3 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=171432&lang=en
171447,The role of probiotics in modulating the barrier function of the gut epithelium,Madsen  Karen L,"Madsen, Karen L",University of Alberta,Alberta,Canada,200809,630992.0,Operating Grant,Operating Grants,Biomedical,"Nutrition, Metabolism and Diabetes",Crohn'S Disease; Inflammatory Bowel Disease; Innate Immunity; Microflora; Probiotics,"The human gut is densely colonized with microbes.  We have evolved over time with these microbes, and it appears that we not only tolerate these organisms, but our immune system and gut requires them for proper development and health.   Lactobacillus and Bifidobacterium strains are found in the human gut and have the ability to regulate immune function.   Strains of Lactobacillus and Bifidobacteria are commonly used as probiotics, which are defined by the World Health Organization as live microorganisms that when administered in adequate amounts, confer a health benefit on the host.  Crohn's disease (CD) and ulcerative colitis (UC) are chronic inflammatory conditions of the gut whose cause remains unknown.  In patients with these diseases, their immune system appears to be responding inappropriately to normal non-pathogenic bacteria in the gut.   The focus of this grant proposal is to isolate bioactive factors that are released from certain strains of probiotic bacteria and to test their ability to prevent the onset of inflammatory bowel disease in mice that are genetically programmed to be susceptible to developing colitis.  Further, we will determine if treating mice with probiotics either during the prenatal period or from birth will decrease their risk of developing inflammatory bowel disease in later life.  The goal of this research is to develop treatments based on probiotics and their products that can be used both to treat patients with Crohn's disease and ulcerative colitis, and to prevent disease occurrence in children that are at high risk of developing the disease because of their genetic background.",5 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=171447&lang=en
171456,"Endoplasmic reticulum membrane contact sites: role in ER polarization, lipid metabolism and protein trafficking.",Loewen  Christopher,"Loewen, Christopher",University of British Columbia,British Columbia,Canada,200809,642840.0,Operating Grant,Operating Grants,Biomedical,"Nutrition, Metabolism and Diabetes",Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis (Als); Endoplasmic Reticulum; Lipid Metabolism; Lipid Transfer Protein; Membrane Contact Sites; Nonvesicular Traffic,"Lipids play important roles in all cells. They are different than many other biological molecules in that they are like oils and do not mix in the aqueous environment of cells. In this way they can function to separate the cell from the outside environment and also divide the cell into distinct compartments, called organelles. These organelles are critical for carrying out biological processes. For example, the integrity of mitochondria is essential to the cell to produce energy and to regulate cell death. It is also imperative that these organelles communicate with each other. Communication of the endoplasmic reticulum with other organelles is especially important to the cell because it is the site of many metabolic activities including making lipids and proteins. The focus of this proposal is to better understand how the endoplasmic reticulum contacts, and hence communicates with other organelles through defining the molecules that mediate these contacts. Studying these contacts is important for human health and disease because their disruption can result in defective movement of lipids, cell stress and cell death. Accumulation of lipids is a factor in many diseases including atherosclerosis, Alzheimer's disease, type 2 diabetes and motorneuron disease, but in many cases what causes the lipids to accumulate is not known. These studies will help to define how this happens and potentially lead to novel drug targets and therapies, thus contributing to the general health of Canadians and to the Canadian economy.",5 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=171456&lang=en
171459,Organ-specific regulation of cell growth and division,Roy  Richard D,"Roy, Richard D",McGill University,Qu&eacute;bec,Canada,200809,741795.0,Operating Grant,Operating Grants,Biomedical,Genetics,C. Elegans; Cancer; Cell Cycle; Genetic Analysis; Rnai; Tumour Suppressors,"The cells within the tissues of an organism must obey controls that tell them when to divide, and importantly, when to stop. These controls are present from the early stages in the embryo, when most tissues are being formed, right up to 
the adult. One of the hallmarks of cancer is the inability to correctly respond to these controls and many of the genes that dictate these decisions  have been found to be altered in malignant tumours. Using a simple model organism called C. elegans my laboratory has uncovered how some of these genes regulate cell division in a simple organ, the intestine. This gives us a simplified model to understand how these mutated genes may also affect tumour growth. By first generating mutants that have abnormal cell divisions in the intestine, we can determine what genes are mutated to cause the observed defects. One of these mutations occurs in a gene involved in driving cell multiplication, and mutant forms of the human gene are associated with aggressive tumours in the head, neck, breast and lung. 
Other mutants we have obtained show defects in the correct integrity of cell divisions that occur later during the formation of the intestine and the genes that are affected in these mutants include an important inhibitor of tumour formation that is mutated in most cancers, although how it works is still misunderstood. Another series of  mutated genes we identified are critical for silencing the expression of many genes required for animal growth. We want to find out how, and with whom, these genes act to control the proliferation and growth of these cells. By better understanding how these genes function, we hope to reveal novel targets around which therapeutic strategies can be developed to fight the growth of cancerous cells in a more specific manner.",5 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=171459&lang=en
171460,Molecular characterization of autophagic cell death,Gorski  Sharon M,"Gorski, Sharon M",B.C. Cancer Research Centre (Vancouver),British Columbia,Canada,200809,300000.0,CIHR New Investigator,Salary Programs,Biomedical,Genetics,Apoptosis; Autophagy; Cancer; Cell Culture; Drosophila; Genetics,"Programmed cell death (PCD) is a biological process that occurs in all animals, including humans, and is important in normal
development and disease. As its name suggests, PCD is the orderly destruction or killing of a cell. In normal development,
the killing of cells is important to help shape developing tissues and control cell numbers. Also, the elimination of damaged
cells is essential to normal development and good health. The inhibition of PCD, or the failure to kill damaged cells, can lead
to cancer. Because of its important roles, it is critical to identify the components involved in PCD and understand how they
function.
PCD can be divided into at least two different subtypes based on the appearance of dying cells; both PCD subtypes have
been implicated in cancer and other human diseases. While Type I PCD has been well studied, virtually nothing is known
about Type II PCD. The main objective of our proposal is to identify and characterize components involved in Type II PCD.
To do so, we will integrate cutting edge techniques with simple experimental systems. We will study in detail one component
that we think functions to help regulate Type II PCD. If we can understand how cells kill themselves in normal development
by Type II PCD, then we might be able to use this knowledge to kill cancer cells. This may be particularly valuable in patients
where Type I PCD does not work. In summary, knowledge of the components of Type II PCD will likely reveal potential new
targets or avenues of investigation for the development of novel cancer therapies.",5 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=171460&lang=en
171462,Neuronal plasticity related to corticothalamic oscillations during sleep and waking behavioral states,Timofeev  Igor,"Timofeev, Igor",Universit&eacute; Laval,Qu&eacute;bec,Canada,200809,810850.0,Operating Grant,Operating Grants,Biomedical,"Neurosciences, Mental Health and Addiction",Cortex; Oscillations; Plasticity; Sleep; Wake,"Multiple resent studies pointed to a straight link between sleep, plasticity, and learning. Here I propose to investigate direct link between these phenomena. I hypothesize that due to spontaneous firing during waking state, cortical neurons reside at a state of steady synaptic plasticity (facilitation or depression).  Long-lasting periods of silence associated with silent phases of sleep slow oscillation, release cortical synapses from steady-state plasticity. A release from steady-state plasticity reinforces synaptic efficacy during consecutive states of either REM sleep or waking state favoring learning. I propose series of electrophysiological experiments that would estimate status of steady-state synaptic plasticity during different states of vigilance, their effects on synaptic efficacy, and associative learning. The results of this study will provide understanding of the role of sleep in memory formation at cellular level.",5 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=171462&lang=en
171464,Targeting connexins to promote functional neuroregeneration,Bennett  Steffany A,"Bennett, Steffany A",University of Ottawa,Ontario,Canada,200809,591570.0,Operating Grant,Operating Grants,Biomedical,"Neurosciences, Mental Health and Addiction",Connexin; Intercelullar Communication; Neural Stem Cells; Neuroregeneration; Stroke; Transgenic Mouse Models Of Disease,"Successful treatment of neurodegenerative disease must involve therapy designed not only to limit the extent of brain cell destruction but also to stimulate repopulation of damaged tissue.  Cell-replacement strategies are key to achieving this goal.  The mammalian adult brain, once thought to be completely post-mitotic, is now recognized to contain a finite number of neural stem and progenitor cells with the capacity for self-renewal and the ability to differentiate into functional brain cells.  To realize the therapeutic potential of these cells, endogenous stem cells must be able to survive in injured tissue, respond to proliferative cues released by damaged brain, and yet cease division, once normal cell number and cell circuitry has been attained. 

Our research is designed to study functional brain repair in degenerating tissue by developing a clearer understanding of how environmental changes impact upon the survival of stem cells over the lifespan of an organism.  Specifically, by using a unique combination of phytochemical (plant chemistry), genetic (mouse models of human disease), and molecular approaches in cells and and animals, we aim to show:

(a) that changing how stem cells communicate with adjacent cells in adult brain can be used to enhance brain repair.

(b) that compounds found in specific plants can be identified and used to target this type of communication and accelerate functional cell replacement in injured brain. 

Our research will provide new insight into how the diseased microenvironment regulates the integration of neural stem and progenitor cells into damaged circuits while leading to the development of new reagents that test the effectiveness of this ""medicine from food"" strategy as an adjuvant treatment for neurodegenerative disease.",5 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=171464&lang=en
171469,Iroquois transcription factors in cardiac development and function,Hui  Chi-Chung,"Hui, Chi-Chung",Hospital for Sick Children (Toronto),Ontario,Canada,200809,716470.0,Operating Grant,Operating Grants,Biomedical,Circulatory and Respiratory Health,Cardiac Physiology; Cardiomyopathies; Heart Development; Homeobox Gene; Mutant Mouse Analysis; Transcription Factor,"Cardiomyopathies and arrythmias are common congenital heart diseases.  The molecular basis of these diseases is not well understood but they are generally believed to involve abnormal physiological functions of cardiac muscle cells.  We have been studying a class of regulatory genes involved in heart development and function.  Genetic studies in mice revealed that they act as switches to turn on or off genes that are involved in establishing action potentials in different regions of the heart and play important role in proper physiological functioning of the adult heart.  Importantly, mutant mice lacking these regulatory factors develop cardiomyopathies and arrythmias, providing excellent models for studying these common human disorders.  In the proposed research, we will dissect the function of these factors during heart development and decipher their actions in the adult heart.",5 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=171469&lang=en
171470,The role of Epidermal Growth Factor Receptor Family in mammary tumorigenesis and metastasis,Muller  William J,"Muller, William J",McGill University,Qu&eacute;bec,Canada,200809,775265.0,Operating Grant,Operating Grants,Biomedical,Genetics,Epidermal Growth Factor Receptor Family; Erbb2; Erbb3; Mammary Tumorigenesis; Transgenic,Elevated expression of members of a class of growth factor receptors known as the epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) family have been implicated as important determinants the induction of breast cancer. The major focus of this renewal application is assess the relative contribution of the different EGFR family members to various stages of breast cancer progression. To accomplish this we taken advantage of number of mouse models of human breast cancer and have used both biochemical and genetic approaches to functionally attenuate different members EGFR in the mammary epithelium. The results of these studies will provide important therapeutic targets to target breast cancer progression.,5 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=171470&lang=en
171471,Cell migration pathways in mammalian cardiovascular development,Jones  Nina,"Jones, Nina",University of Guelph,Ontario,Canada,200809,520080.0,Operating Grant,Operating Grants,Biomedical,Genetics,Actin Cytoskeleton; Angiogenesis; Heart Development; Mouse Genetics; Signal Transduction; Tyrosine Phosphorylation,"In my laboratory, we are exploring the molecular mechanisms that regulate the structure and function of the specialized endothelial cells lining our blood vessels. Endothelial cells depend on the underlying actin cytoskeleton for cellular shape and movement, key processes in angiogenesis that occur during normal development and wound healing, as well as in pathological states such as inflammation and tumour growth. We are investigating an actin-associated protein which we hypothesize is central to these processes. Increasing our understanding of endothelial cell biology and blood vessel growth may reveal novel molecular targets that can be used for the development of therapeutic strategies against cardiovascular diseases and cancer. In turn, these initiatives will aid in reducing the enormous burden of vascular diseases in Canada.",5 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=171471&lang=en
171472,Macrophage Polarization and the Development of Atherosclerosis,Hill  John S,"Hill, John S",University of British Columbia,British Columbia,Canada,200809,404358.0,Operating Grant,Operating Grants,Biomedical,Circulatory and Respiratory Health,Atherosclerosis; Macrophage; Mouse Model; Stat4; Stat6,"Heart disease occurs when important blood vessels become narrow or blocked and can no longer give enough blood to meet the demand of the heart. Heart disease is the leading cause of death in the Western world and will soon become the leading cause of death in developing nations. 

Since a cell type called macrophages are the cells primarily responsible for fat and cholesterol accumulation in arteries supplying blood to the heart, the primary research focus of my lab is to develop methods to target macrophages to either prevent fat accumuation or enhance its removal if it already exists. In this context, the objective of the current proposal seeks to identify and charcterize the functional properties of different types of macrophages, some of which appear beneficial and others deterimental.

We will use an animal model and intentionally change the quality of macrophages present to determine if this change can affect the development of heart disease. The investigation of different types of macrophages and their influence on the development of heart disease has not been studied previously.
 
The proposal seeks to identify the varying disease potential of cells that have been established to have a critical role in lesion development in arteries supplying blood to the heart. Once this study determines which type of macrophages are the most beneficial in regards to protection from disease, my lab will pursue strategies aimed at the development of novel therapeutics than can modulate macrophage function to either protect patients at an increased risk of heart disease or prevent progression of existing disease.",3 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=171472&lang=en
171474,A Novel Method for Pharmacosurveillance: Combining an Electronic Prescribing and Drug Management System and Administrative Database,Tamblyn  Robyn M,"Tamblyn, Robyn M",McGill University,Qu&eacute;bec,Canada,200809,317187.0,Operating Grant,Operating Grants,Social / Cultural / Environmental / Population Health,Population and Public Health,Adverse Drug Reactions; Electronic Prescribing & Drug Managment System; Ineffective Treatments; Off-Label Indications; Patient Safety; Pharmacosurveillance,"Medications are the most frequent causes of preventable adverse events including illness, and death. Drugs do not have complete information on safety and effectiveness at the time of market approval. Present-day adverse drug reaction monitoring systems rely on health professionals to report and miss more than 90% of adverse drug reactions. There is an urgent need to develop better methods of monitoring the safety and effectiveness of drugs after they enter the market. The use of health administrative and electronic prescribing and health record data are two new approaches that could be used to provide a more timely and accurate detection of adverse drug effects. The purpose of this study is to evaluate the accuracy of administrative data in detecting adverse drug events, and the improvement in the accuracy of detection with the addition of electronic prescribing data. We will assess these new methods of post-market surveillance in a cohort of 2,300 patients within the primary care practices of 104 physicians using electronic prescribing systems. Patients who are newly prescribed drugs for hypertension, depression and pain will be included, as these medications are commonly prescribed and implicated in adverse drug events. We will use patient interviews and chart review to collect information about adverse effects during a 6 month follow-up period. We will use electronic prescribing orders for drug discontinuation due to adverse effects, as well as diagnostic codes in administrative records of medical visits and hospitalizations to determine whether these two sources of information can accurately detect the adverse drug events. The results of this study will be used to evaluate whether these new sources of information-administrative and electronic prescribing data-could be immediately used to institute a more effective means of monitoring the safety and effectiveness of drugs in Canada.",3 yrs 6 mths,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=171474&lang=en
171487,Defining functional relationships in eukaryotic cellular signaling networks using evolutionary comparative systems biology,Landry  Christian,"Landry, Christian",Universit&eacute; Laval,Qu&eacute;bec,Canada,200809,300000.0,CIHR New Investigator,Salary Programs,Biomedical,Genetics,Cell Signaling; Genomics; Phosphorylation; Proteomics; Regulatory Network; Systems Biology,"Genes and gene products are regulated at multiple levels.  Post-translational regulation by protein phosphorylation is of central importance in all cellular and developmental processes, in which protein kinases occupy key roles in signal partition, integration and transmission. The phosphorylation of proteins regulates their activity, localization, stability and interactions with other proteins. Perturbations of these regulatory mechanisms are implicated in numerous genetic diseases such as cancer. The human genome contains hundreds of related protein kinases and hundreds of thousands of potential phosphorylation sites, however, only a small fraction of these are phosphorylated, and this in a time- and localization-dependent manner by specific protein kinases. There is therefore a strong need to determine how these protein kinases can specify distinct cellular responses, what the molecular determinants of their specificity are and how mutations affect their regulating functions at the network and cellular levels. We will use an evolutionary systems-biology approach to dissect the organization of signaling pathways of key protein kinases and the mechanisms by which specificity is achieved. We will use the budding yeast as a model system, as it offers powerful molecular biology and genomics tools and since the number of protein kinases and associated factors has expanded in its recent evolutionary history.  A functional dissection of paralogs (within species) and orthologs (between species) will allow to determine how new kinase-substrate interactions have been created and lost following these expansions, how the corresponding pathways have concomitantly been reorganized and thus how specificities of signaling pathways is encoded at the molecular level. This project will help answer questions such as how mutations can reroute signaling networks, as it is the case for several human diseases, and how network complexity evolves by the addition of regulatory proteins.",5 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=171487&lang=en
171490,Defining functional relationships in eukaryotic cellular signaling networks using evolutionary comparative systems biology,Landry  Christian,"Landry, Christian",Universit&eacute; Laval,Qu&eacute;bec,Canada,200809,563475.0,Operating Grant,Operating Grants,Biomedical,Genetics,Cell Signalling; Genomics; Phosphorylation; Proteomics; Regulatory Network; Systems Biology,"Genes and gene products are regulated at multiple levels.  Post-translational regulation by protein phosphorylation is of central importance in all cellular and developmental processes, in which protein kinases occupy key roles in signal transmission. The phosphorylation of proteins regulates their activity, localization, stability and interactions with other proteins. Perturbations of these regulatory mechanisms are implicated in numerous genetic diseases such as cancer. The human genome contains hundreds of related protein kinases and hundreds of thousands of potential phosphorylation sites, however, only a small fraction of these are phosphorylated, and this in a time- and localization-dependent manner by specific protein kinases. There is therefore a strong need to determine how these protein kinases can specify distinct cellular responses, what are molecular determinants of their specificity and how mutations affect their regulating functions at the network and cellular levels. I will use an evolutionary systems-biology approach to dissect the organization of signaling pathways of key protein kinases and the mechanisms by which specificity is achieved. I will use the budding yeast as a model system, as it offers powerful molecular biology and genomics tools and because the number of protein kinases and associated factors has expanded by gene duplication in its recent evolutionary history.  A functional dissection of paralogs (within species) and orthologs (between species) will allow to determine how new kinase-substrate interactions have been created and lost following these expansions, how the corresponding pathways have concomitantly been reorganized and thus how specificities of signaling pathways are encoded at the molecular level. This project will help answer questions such as how mutations can reroute signaling networks, as it is the case for several human diseases, and how network complexity evolves by the addition of regulatory proteins.",5 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=171490&lang=en
171491,Characterization and efficacy of bisphosphonate eluting orthopaedic implants,Bobyn  John D,"Bobyn, John D; Tanzer, Michael",Research Institute of the McGill University Health Centre,Qu&eacute;bec,Canada,200809,321624.0,Operating Grant,Operating Grants,Biomedical,Musculoskeletal Health and Arthritis,Drug Release; Histology; Implant Fixation; Joint Replacement; Peri-Implant Bone Formation; Porous Biomaterials,Many joint replacement devices are attached directly to bone by encouraging bone formation in and around the implant surface.  The use of drugs such as bisphosphponates that enhance local bone formation would improve the efficacy and longevity of implant fixation.  Attaching bisphosphonate compounds directly to an implant for progressive release to surrounding bone is a simple and effective means to achieve this goal.,3 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=171491&lang=en
171497,Exploring the Disease Burden Associated with Community Acquired Pneumonia,Eurich  Dean,"Eurich, Dean; Majumdar, Sumit R",University of Alberta,Alberta,Canada,200809,135785.0,Operating Grant,Operating Grants,Social / Cultural / Environmental / Population Health,Population and Public Health,Health-Care Utilization; Morbidity/Mortality; Patient Care; Prospective Cohort; Risk Stratification,"Pneumonia (serious infection of the lungs) is a common reason for hospitalization and in this day and age is still the 6th leading cause of death in Canada.  Despite how common and costly it is, surprisingly little is known about pneumonia, especially regarding patients treated outside of the hospital.  Furthermore, many people suspect that an episode of pneumonia might signal poor health and long term problems with illness and repeat episodes of pneumonia.

Therefore, we created a cohort of 7000 patients with pneumonia treated between 2000 and 2002 in Alberta.  We collected detailed information on all of these patients, including how sick they were, how much oxygen they needed, and how bad their pneumonia was - information not routinely available in regular administrative databases.  We now propose following those patients for 5 years in a virtual fashion - by finding out what happened to them using provincial databases that record morbidity and mortality rates.  Using advanced analytic techniques we will describe rates (and predictors) of death, repeat pneumonia, and hospitalizations over 5 years; explore the role of how strong and mobile someone is and how they do after pneumonia (their functional status); and figure out how important it is to have ""enough"" oxygen before going home with a bad pneumonia.

Our study will be the largest and longest study of pneumonia patients that has ever been put together.  The results will help doctors figure out who needs more attention after they go home with pneumonia and who is better off coming in to the hospital and most important help patients and policy-makers figure out who might need more help and attention down the road because they are at high risk of getting pneumonia again or even unnecessarily dying.",3 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=171497&lang=en
171501,Characterization of the Role of Inpp4b in Bone Physiology,Vacher  Jean,"Vacher, Jean",Institut de recherches cliniques de Montr&eacute;al,Qu&eacute;bec,Canada,200809,451591.0,Operating Grant,Operating Grants,Biomedical,Musculoskeletal Health and Arthritis,Bone Homeostasis; Bone Mineral Density; Inositol Phosphatase; Molecular Biology; Osteoclast Differentiation And Activation; Osteopetrosis; Osteoporosis,"The overall objective of our laboratory is to understand the molecular and cellular mechanisms that regulate bone homeostasis. Bone homeostasis requires equilibrium between bone formation and bone resorption by the osteoclast that derives from hematopoietic lineage. To gain insights into these complex mechanisms, we combine cellular and molecular approaches to characterize novel gene activities essential in osteoclast biology. We have recently isolated a novel lipid phosphatase, Inpp4b, associated with osteoclast differentiation/maturation and activation. To understand in vivo and ex vivo the role of this protein in osteoclast biology, we will use complementary approaches of specific inactivation/silencing as well as targeted expression of Inpp4b in the osteoclast. Importantly, based on our preliminary results, we will also investigate the role of INPP4B in human as a candidate gene for modulation of bone mineral density. These complementary experiments will provide us with a better understanding of the role of Inpp4b in osteoclast physiology. The characterization of the cellular and molecular functions of this protein in the osteoclast may lead to the discovery of novel target genes and the design of therapeutic approaches to be translated into a better treatment of patients suffering from bone defects.",3 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=171501&lang=en
171505,Investigating the Role of Self-Report Bias in Health Inequalities Between and Within Countries,Harper  Samuel,"Harper, Samuel",McGill University,Qu&eacute;bec,Canada,200809,181307.0,Operating Grant,Operating Grants,Social / Cultural / Environmental / Population Health,Population and Public Health,Disability; Global Health; Health Inequalities,"As people in many countries are living longer, health conditions that are not usually fatal, such as mental disorders, arthritis, and vision and hearing problems are becoming increasingly important aspects of health and well-being.  We often measure these aspects of health by asking people to report on how much difficulty they have with certain activities or health conditions.  However, people from different countries or from different backgrounds may interpret the same question differently.  For example, asking a 25-year old and a 70-year old how much difficulty they have walking stairs may be difficult if the two individuals use different scales when thinking about their ability.  This means that observed differences between countries or social groups reflect both objective differences in health and also differences in the way people interpret the questions.  Recent developments in survey techniques now allow the possibility of accounting for differences in the way individuals understand questions about their health by using brief descriptions of specific health states to put everyone's responses on a similar scale.  This study will use these 'anchors' to provide better measures of the prevalence of non-fatal health conditions across different countries, and between gender and economic groups within countries.  The findings from this study will help to provide better measures of the importance of non-fatal health conditions across the globe.",3 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=171505&lang=en
171506,Environmental determinants of obesity and related metabolic risk factors in urban and rural communities across Canada,Lear  Scott A,"Lear, Scott A","Simon Fraser University (Burnaby, B.C.)",British Columbia,Canada,200809,577327.0,Operating Grant,Operating Grants,Social / Cultural / Environmental / Population Health,"Nutrition, Metabolism and Diabetes",Built Environment; Nutrition; Obesity; Physical Activity; Risk Factors,"With nearly a quarter obese and over half overweight in Canada, the prevalence of obesity is a growing concern. The rapid rise in obesity in recent years suggests a strong environmental influence. Where we live can influence our daily activity and nutrition, and therefore our long-term health. By studying both urban and rural communities across Canada we will identify aspects of the environment that relate to obesity and related risk factors in 10 000 residents. This study represents the largest of its kind in Canada to tackle the issue of the environment and obesity.",3 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=171506&lang=en
171507,Applying a theory-based approach to identify the determinants of the intention of dietitians to engage in shared decision making behaviors,Desroches  Sophie,"Desroches, Sophie",Universit&eacute; Laval,Qu&eacute;bec,Canada,200809,106436.0,Operating Grant,Operating Grants,Health systems / services,Health Services and Policy Research,Knowledge Translation; Nutrition; Shared Decision Making,"Enormous scientific advances have been made in the area of nutrition, and several diets are now advocated for the management of chronic diseases including cardiovascular diseases, diabetes and obesity. Patients have also become reliant on the unregulated nutrition information emerging in cyberspace, television and magazines to base their diet-related decisions. As a result, the need for patient guidance and decision support from dietitians is expected to increase in the near future. Shared decision making is defined as a decision-making process jointly shared by patients and their health professional. It aims at helping patients play an active role in decisions concerning their health and fosters the establishment of a context in which the preferences of the patient are sought and his/her opinions valued. To date, few studies have explored shared decision making in health professionals other than physicians. Therefore, this research program proposes to identify the determinants of the intention of dietitians and patients to adopt selected behaviors necessary to engage in shared decision making. Studying shared decision making in nutrition has the potential to contribute to the acquisition of skills that will allow patients to make decisions that are best for them in interaction with their dietitians, which will result in an overall improvement of the quality and effectiveness of health services and care of patients facing nutrition-related decisions.",2 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=171507&lang=en
171512,Influence of homing endonucleases on gene structure and function,Edgell  David R,"Edgell, David R",Western University (Ontario),Ontario,Canada,200809,300000.0,CIHR New Investigator,Salary Programs,Biomedical,Genetics,Gene Regulation; Genome Structure And Function; Homing Endonucleases; Interrupted Open Reading Frame; Protein Purification; Protein-Dna Interactions,"A significant fraction of the genome of any organism is composed of mobile genetic elements, discrete units of nucleic acid that promote their own spread within and between genomes.  Commonly referred to as selfish or junk DNA, mobile elements have profound influences on evolution by promoting genomic rearrangements that can be both beneficial and deleterious to organisms.  Mobile elements can impact on human health in a number of ways, by inserting into genes and disrupting function, by influencing expression of genes, and by promoting dissemination of antibiotic resistance genes.  The goal of our research is to determine how mobile elements regulate their activity so that they do no effect genomic integrity.  Results from our research will lead to a greater understanding of the dynamic interplay between mobile elements and genomes, and identify cellular mechanisms that regulate spread of mobile elements and minimize deleterious effects on gene structure and function.",5 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=171512&lang=en
171515,Sleep and Obesity in Children and Adolescents: Identifying Pathogenic Pathways,McGrath  Jennifer J,"McGrath, Jennifer J","Concordia University (Montreal, Quebec)",Qu&eacute;bec,Canada,200809,300000.0,CIHR New Investigator,Salary Programs,Social / Cultural / Environmental / Population Health,"Nutrition, Metabolism and Diabetes",Childhood Obesity,"One in four Canadian children is overweight or obese. Over the past 25 years, the level of overweight and obesity has doubled. This is worrying because it has long term health consequences. Childhood obesity increases risk for many diseases such as high blood pressure, heart disease, and diabetes. While obesity levels have been rising, the amount of time children spend sleeping has been decreasing.  Recently, researchers found that children who sleep less have a larger body size. Even small decreases in children's sleeping time are related to greater body size. It is not clear why sleep and obesity are linked. Researchers have started to look at many factors that may explain the link between sleep and obesity. Some factors include hormones dealing with appetite, stress, breathing problems during sleep, eating habits, and changes in metabolism and sensitivity to insulin. Most researchers look at these factors singularly. Also, most studies use only self (or parent) reports of sleep times. This may not be the best way of capturing what happens during sleep. The goal of the current project is to consider three pathways that may link sleep to obesity at the same time to see how they are related. These three pathways include activation of the body's stress system, changing hormones associated with appetite, or altering how the body metabolizes glucose. Sleep will also be measured objectively using a device to measure brain activity when children sleep at home. The project will result in new information about why sleep may be linked to obesity. This information might then be able to help prevent and treat obesity.",5 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=171515&lang=en
171535,"The Effect of Primary Care on Health Care System Outcomes: Health Services Utilization, Health Care Spending, and Population Health",Strumpf  Erin C,"Strumpf, Erin C",McGill University,Qu&eacute;bec,Canada,200809,243589.0,Operating Grant,Operating Grants,Health systems / services,Health Services and Policy Research,Causal Inference With Observational Data; Efficiency Of Health Care Services; Health Care Costs; Health Care Service Utilization; Population Health; Primary Care,"Despite differences in health care system design, all developed countries wrestle with ensuring access to high-quality health services, improving population health, and controlling health care costs.  Most societies also prioritize equity in the receipt of needed services and in health outcomes.  Researchers and policymakers have shown substantial interest in the ability of primary care-focused health care delivery systems to achieve these goals.  Despite existing research describing individual and community characteristics associated with more advanced models of primary care, we know little about the broader implications for the health care system, specifically the impacts on health care utilization, costs and health outcomes.  
To address these outstanding questions, we will use the policy experiment created by Quebec's establishment of family medicine groups in 2002 to strengthen primary care.  By joining novel administrative and survey data with experienced health economists, methodologists and policy analysts, we aim to understand the effects of primary care reform on health care utilization, costs and health outcomes.  A better understanding of these impacts will inform policymakers' efforts to improve population health and control health care spending both in Canada and abroad.",3 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=171535&lang=en
171545,Role of Th-17 in the pathogenesis of severe asthma,Hamid  Qutayba A,"Hamid, Qutayba A",McGill University,Qu&eacute;bec,Canada,200809,700397.0,Operating Grant,Operating Grants,Biomedical,Circulatory and Respiratory Health,Asthma; Cytokines; Remodeling; Smooth Muscle; Steroids; T Cells,Severe asthma is found in 10% of asthmatics but is responsible for a disproportionately high fraction of the health care budget. We have recently developed a program to identify difficult to treat asthma and examined its pathophysiology. We have shown that biopsies from severe asthmatics compared to the ones from moderate and mild forms of the disease are associated with different type of inflammation and uncontrolled remodeling. A new subset of T cells was recently identified (Th-17). The major hypothesis of this proposal to be tested is that Th-17 is an important cell in the pathogenesis of severe asthma and that cytokines produced by this type of T cells are responsible for the steroid hypo- responsiveness and the uncontrolled increase in smooth muscle mass and subepithelial fibrosis. We will be using human tissue and cell lines in combination with advanced molecular techniques to test this hypothesis. Results from this proposal may explain the pathophysiology of severe asthma and open up new avenues in designing new therapeutic approaches to control or reverse the disease.,5 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=171545&lang=en
171552,Penetrating wound induced epileptogenisis,Timofeev  Igor,"Timofeev, Igor",Universit&eacute; Laval,Qu&eacute;bec,Canada,200809,661275.0,Operating Grant,Operating Grants,Biomedical,"Neurosciences, Mental Health and Addiction",Cortex; Epilepsy; Intrinsic; Sleep-Wake; Synaptic; Trauma,"Vietnam and Croatia war epidemiological studies demonstrated that in penetrating cortical wounds (cortical trauma) would cause acute seizures in up to 80% of patients and 50% of them will develop epilepsy several months or years later. The process that develops between initial insult and onset of epilepsy called epileptogenesis. In this grant we will test hypothesis that the major epileptogenic factor in trauma induced epileptogenesis is deafferentation caused by axonal damage and cell loss. Other brain conditions, stroke, tumor Alzhimer's disease are also associated with deafferentation and increased incidence of epilepsy. Trauma induced epilepsy is poorly controlled by currently available medication. In order to understand and to prevent trauma induced epileptogenesis, I propose to investigate physiological and morphological alterations of cortical tissue induced by penetrating wounds. Understanding the network and cellular mechanisms of trauma-induced epileptogenesis will lead to development of new treatment strategies. Prevention of epileptogenesis will prevent epilepsy.",5 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=171552&lang=en
171559,Biochemical and functional characterization of the myeloid lymphoma leukemia protein and its core complex subunits.,Couture  Jean-Fran&ccedil;ois,"Couture, Jean-François",University of Ottawa,Ontario,Canada,200809,525620.0,Operating Grant,Operating Grants,Biomedical,Cancer Research,Biochemistry; Chromatin Remodelling; Crystallography; Histone Methylation; Mll Network; Myeloid Lymphoma Leukemia,"Cells are composed of millions of molecules working symbiotically to maintain a cellular balance. If broken, this fragile orchestration of events could potentially lead to chemical alterations of the cell and ultimately, following many uncontrolled molecular events, to cancer. Considering the expanding repertoire of proteins linked to cancers, it is indubitably critical to develop and use advanced techniques to study such molecules.  These facts emphasize the needs for investment in basic research with a view to identifying novel targets to treat cancers and pioneering strategy to study them. That in mind, our laboratory has developed an innovating approach, which consists in combining structural biology, genomic and biochemical techniques to build the most accurate model for cancer development and by extension its treatment.  Our work focuses on the elucidation of the molecular details eliciting cancer-related proteins and their structures, in other words, how a protein works. Our research program uses the information provided by protein structures, with a special focus on leukemia, to decipher and understand how this cancer is formed and how we can cure it. We believe that this work will lead to a better understanding of leukemia-related proteins and provide an initial canvas to develop new therapeutic molecules. By using these approaches, we are confident that we will be able to deepen our understanding on how leukemia evolves and its overall impact on cellular symbiosis.  In sum, we will expand the knowledge on cancer-related molecules and initiate the process of therapeutic molecule identification and development.  Overall, our work will benefit the Ottawa region, Ontario and Canada on two critical inter-related levels: health and fundamental science.",5 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=171559&lang=en
171560,Genetic and functional analyses of inflammatory caspase functions in inflammation and immunity,Saleh  Maya,"Saleh, Maya",McGill University,Qu&eacute;bec,Canada,200809,812615.0,Operating Grant,Operating Grants,Biomedical,Infection and Immunity,Apoptosis; Caspases-Inflammasomes; Cytokines-Alarmins; Inflammation; Pathogen Clearance; Sepsis,"Two of the main challenges that multicellular organisms faced during evolution were to cope with invading microorganisms and eliminate and replace dying cells. Our innate immune system evolved to handle both tasks. Key aspects of innate immunity are 1) the detection of invaders or tissue injury and 2) the activation of inflammation that alarms the system by producing factors called cytokines and chemokines. While inflammation is essential for host resistance to infections, it is detrimental when produced chronically or in excess and is linked to various diseases, most notably auto-immune diseases, auto-inflammatory disorders, cancer and septic shock. Essential regulators of inflammation are enzymes termed « the inflammatory caspases » : They are activated by cellular sensors of danger signals, such as the presence of pathogen-derived molecules or damaged tissue, and consequently convert pro-inflammatory cytokines into their mature active forms. In addition, they induce death of infected cells as a defense strategy to clear pathogens. Our research program is aimed at understanding how the inflammatory caspases are activated and what are the consequences of their activation. Our ultimate goal is to find ways to manipulate their activity or modulate their downstream effects for therapeutic interventions in immune-mediated inflammatory diseases.",5 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=171560&lang=en
171578,Keeping Gay and Bisexual Men Safe: A History of HIV Prevention Work in Toronto,Green  Adam,"Green, Adam",University of Toronto,Ontario,Canada,200809,300000.0,CIHR New Investigator,Salary Programs,Health systems / services,Health Services and Policy Research,Hiv Prevention; Institutional Ethnography; Msm; Social History,"HIV prevention work for men who have sex with men (MSM) represents a front-line institutional response to the HIV/AIDS epidemic, but one that is highly contested and complex in its organization, substance and execution.  This study provides a social history of MSM HIV prevention work in Toronto--a city with the highest concentration of HIV infected MSM and one of the most well-developed outreach and prevention programs in Canada.  The study will focus on the institutional processes that underpin front-line HIV prevention outreach and service organizations, including: 1)  How have MSM HIV prevention programs executed prevention services over  time and what has been their relationship to each other and to the state?

2) What expert epidemiological, social scientific and local folk knowledges regarding HIV have emerged over the past 25 years and how have they been  translated to prevention work?

3) What impact have external stakeholders, including federal and provincial funders and non-state actors such as the media and ethnic based community leaders, had on the form and substance of prevention work?

4) How has the target MSM subject been constructed in discourse and how has it changed over time? 

Through interviews with past and present service providers, organizational leaders and policy makers, along with archival research and analysis of prevention materials and organizational documents and minutes, the study will examine the history in which key AIDS Service Organizations (ASO) and ethnocultural community based organizations contested, coordinated and transformed HIV prevention for the MSM population of Toronto.",5 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=171578&lang=en
171580,Regulation of cytoskeletal dynamics during cell division,Piekny  Alisa J,"Piekny, Alisa J","Concordia University (Montreal, Quebec)",Qu&eacute;bec,Canada,200809,641064.0,Operating Grant,Operating Grants,Biomedical,Genetics,Cell Division; Cytoskeleton; Mass Spectrometry; Microscopy; Molecular Biology; Rho Signaling,"Cell division occurs due to the ingression of a contractile actin-myosin ring, which pinches the mother cell to form two daughter cells. The goal of cell division is to ensure that the daughter cells form with the proper complement of chromosomes and cytosolic components. Failure to do so may be detrimental, for example, cells that inherit the incorrect number of chromosomes will have instable genomes, which can lead to tumour formation. Also, cells without the proper cytosolic components may adopt a different cell fate, which may disrupt the developmental program of an organism. Despite the importance of cell division, we still do not understand the mechanism that defines the division plane. The mitotic spindle is a structure that provides signals to initiate contractile ring formation. One part of the mitotic spindle, the central spindle, forms between segregating chromosomes and provides a stimulatory cue to activate the small GTPase RhoA, the upstream regulator of actin and myosin. We have started to identify some of the molecular components of this pathway, however it is still not clear how they temporally and spatially coordinate RhoA activation.  The objective of this proposal is to further understand the regulation of cytoskeletal dynamics during cell division in animal cells, in particular, to understand the mechanism that defines the division plane by restricting the localization of active RhoA to form the contractile ring at the right place and time.",5 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=171580&lang=en
171581,Longitudinal comparison of quality of life among kidney transplant recipients and nocturnal home hemodialysis patients,Pauly  Robert P,"Pauly, Robert P",University of Alberta,Alberta,Canada,200809,127434.0,Operating Grant,Operating Grants,Clinical,Health Services and Policy Research,Kidney Transplantation; Nocturnal Hemodialysis; Quality Of Life,"End-stage kidney disease occurs when the kidneys stop functioning and a person becomes dependent on dialysis or transplantation to remain alive.  At present, this condition affects over 32,000 Canadians.  To date, the best treatment option is kidney transplantation.  Unfortunately the demand for transplantation greatly exceeds the organ supply, thus creating long wait-lists, waiting times, and death while waiting.  Thus patients languish in conventional dialysis programs where their quality of life and their life-expectancy is substantially lower compared to transplantation.  However, a novel dialysis strategy provides new hope: nocturnal home hemodialysis (NHD).  NHD allows patients to administer their dialysis at home while asleep. They receive 3 to 4 times more therapy than with conventional dialysis, and experience dramatically improved clinical and biochemical outcomes, as well as quality of life compared to conventional hemodialysis.  We have recently demonstrated that NHD patients have equal survival to deceased donor transplantation - in stark contrast to conventional dialysis where survival is inferior to transplantation.  This prompted us to ask whether NHD also results in a similar quality of life as transplantation; this is the focus of our proposal.  We aim to use four well characterized health questionnaires to assess quality of life among transplant recipients and patients undergoing NHD and hypothesize that quality of life will be similar between these patient groups and remain similar over time.  This study is important since it will help clarify whether NHD is an appropriate alternative to kidney transplantation and diffuse pressure off transplant wait-lists.  Knowing that survival is similar between these treatments, adding knowledge about quality of life will offer patients a more complete understanding of what their treatment trade-offs are.  This study has the potential to affect the lives of thousands of kidney disease patients across Canada.",3 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=171581&lang=en
171589,Endocrine influences on epithelial ovarian cancer,Leung  Peter C,"Leung, Peter C",BC Children's Hospital Research Institute,British Columbia,Canada,200809,694985.0,Operating Grant,Operating Grants,Biomedical,"Human Development, Child and Youth Health",Cancer; Cell Culture; Endocrinology; Hormone Receptors; Ovary,"Ovarian cancer is the most lethal and primary cause of death from gynecological malignancies for women in developed countries. A better understanding of the pathophysiology of this devastating disease will lead to the development of clinical screening procedures and drug therapies, thus improving the survival rate for patients. Epithelial ovarian carcinomas comprise approximately 90 % of malignant ovarian tumors. There is increasing evidence that hormones and growth factors can influence the occurrence and progression of epithelial ovarian carcinomas. In this proposal, we plan to further delineate the mechanisms underlying the actions of GnRH-II and gonadotropins in epithelial ovarian cancer cells, with emphasis on cell invasiveness. In particular, we will examine the cross-talk between these hormones and epidermal growth factor (EGF) that is known to play key roles in ovarian cancer cell progression. We will also investigate hormonal influences on the transformation of non-invasive serous borderline ovarian tumors to low-grade invasive carcinomas. The findings will add significantly to our understanding of the invasive properties of epithelial ovarian carcinomas, which are responsible for most of the morbidity and mortality due to ovarian cancer.",5 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=171589&lang=en
171590,Which Patients Are Most Likely To Benefit From Total Joint Arthroplasty and What Do They Need To Know?,Hawker  Gillian A,"Hawker, Gillian A",Women's College Hospital (Toronto),Ontario,Canada,200809,359121.0,Operating Grant,Operating Grants,Health systems / services,Musculoskeletal Health and Arthritis,Cohort Study; Health Care Outcomes; Health Services Research; Osteoarthritis; Total Joint Arthroplasty; Women'S Health,"Total joint replacement of the hip and knee, TJR, is effective in reducing pain and improving mobility in Canadians with hip/knee arthritis when medical treatment fails. However, studies show that many people with severe hip/knee arthritis are unwilling to consider TJR as a treatment option. A number of potential explanations for this unwillingness have been proposed, including misperceptions of the indications, risks and benefits of the surgery. However, it's unknown which of these is most important in determining unwillingness, and if differences exist depending on the patient's age, sex or education. Research also suggests that primary care physicians (PCPs) share many of the same misperceptions about TJR as their patients, resulting in failure to identify and refer appropriate and willing TJR candidates for surgical opinion. Our goal is to ensure that people who may benefit from TJR have an opportunity for an informed discussion about TJR with their PCP. To this end, we will interview 660 potential TJR candidates who have not been previously offered TJR and who indicate being unwilling or unsure about having TJR if it were offered. Participants will be asked the importance they place on factors identified to date as determinants of TJR willingness. Responses will be examined for differences by age, sex and education. We will also conduct focus groups in PCPs, chosen from among those who care for interview participants, to determine their perceptions of TJR, and factors affecting referral of their patients for surgical consultation. Finally, using data collected since 1994 on a group of Ontarians with hip/knee arthritis, we will evaluate the predictors of poor TJR outcome, based on changes in pain, mobility, and health care use. This research will inform the development of  strategies aimed at influencing physicians' judgment about their patients' need for TJA and in turn the patients' willingness to consider this recommendation for treatment when offered.",3 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=171590&lang=en
171591,Étude des facteurs psychosociaux impliqués dans le trouble du sommeil associé au travail de nuit.,Vallieres  Annie,"Vallieres, Annie",Universit&eacute; Laval,Qu&eacute;bec,Canada,200809,300000.0,CIHR New Investigator,Salary Programs,Clinical,"Neurosciences, Mental Health and Addiction",Facteurs Biopsychosociaux; Psychologie De La Santé; Recherche Clinique Observationnelle; Travail De Nuit Et À Horaire Rotatif; Troubles Du Sommeil,"Selon une étude récente, 14% des travailleurs de nuit et 8% des travailleurs à horaire rotatif souffrent du trouble du sommeil associé à leur horaire de travail. Des conséquences négatives importantes, tant pour le travailleur que pour la société, découlent de ce problème; elles peuvent être associées à l'augmentation du risque de dépression, de morbidité et d'ulcères gastriques ainsi qu'à une augmentation de l'absentéisme et du nombre d'accidents au travail. Ces difficultés de sommeil s'expliquent principalement par le fait que l'horaire de travail amène les travailleurs de nuit à dormir au moment où leur horloge biologique favorise l'éveil. Récemment, il a été suggéré que des facteurs psychologiques, comme la présence de symptômes dépressifs, ou des facteurs sociaux, telle que la satisfaction conjugale, aient un rôle dans l'évolution de ces difficultés. Alors que plusieurs auteurs soutiennent l'importance de ces facteurs psychosociaux, aucune étude n'a tenté de les identifier puis d'en faire des cibles de traitement. Quelle est l'influence de ces facteurs sur les conséquences négatives du travail de nuit? Y a-t-il une vulnérabilité qui prédispose certaines personnes à développer des difficultés de sommeil lorsqu'elles travaillent de nuit? Y a-t-il des comportements ou des facteurs environnementaux qui favorisent une meilleure adaptation au travail de nuit? Le projet proposé vise à répondre à ces questions en étudiant le sommeil, l'éveil et l'état psychologique du travailleur de nuit à horaire fixe et rotatif avec ou sans difficulté de sommeil. Les résultats de cette étude fourniront de nouvelles informations quant à la compréhension du développement et du maintien des difficultés de sommeil chez cette population nocturne. Le but est de développer par la suite des plans de prévention et des interventions efficaces pour aider les travailleurs de nuit à mieux vivre avec leur horaire de travail.",5 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=171591&lang=en
171603,Keeping Gay and Bisexual Men Safe: A History of HIV Prevention Work in Toronto,Green  Adam,"Green, Adam",University of Toronto,Ontario,Canada,200809,290918.0,Operating Grant,Operating Grants,Health systems / services,Health Services and Policy Research,Hiv Prevention; Msm; Sexual Health; Social History,"HIV prevention work for men who have sex with men (MSM) represents a front-line institutional response to the HIV/AIDS epidemic, but one that is highly contested and complex in its organization, substance and execution.  This study provides a social history of MSM HIV prevention work in Toronto--a city with the highest concentration of HIV infected MSM and one of the most well-developed outreach and prevention programs in Canada.  The study will focus on the institutional processes that underpin front-line HIV prevention outreach and service organizations, including: 1)  How have MSM HIV prevention programs executed prevention services over  time and what has been their relationship to each other and to the state?

2) What expert epidemiological, social scientific and local folk knowledges regarding HIV have emerged over the past 25 years and how have they been  translated to prevention work?

3) What impact have external stakeholders, including federal and provincial funders and non-state actors such as the media and ethnic based community leaders, had on the form and substance of prevention work?

4) How has the target MSM subject been constructed in discourse and how has it changed over time? 

Through interviews with past and present service providers, organizational leaders and policy makers, along with archival research and analysis of prevention materials and organizational documents and minutes, the study will examine the history in which key AIDS Service Organizations (ASO) and ethnocultural community based organizations contested, coordinated and transformed HIV prevention for the MSM population of Toronto.",5 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=171603&lang=en
171606,Induction of death by fratricide as a mechanism of persistence of biofilm infections,Levesque  Celine M,"Levesque, Celine M",University of Toronto,Ontario,Canada,200809,520899.0,Operating Grant,Operating Grants,Biomedical,Musculoskeletal Health and Arthritis,Bacteriocin; Biofilm Infections; Peptide Pheromone; Programmed Cell Death; Signal Transduction System; Streptococci,"Microbiologists have traditionally focused on free-floating bacteria growing in laboratory cultures; yet they have recently come to realize that in the natural world more than 99% of all bacteria live in biofilm communities. As a result, biofilm research is now one of the hottest topics in microbiology. More than 80% of all bacterial infections (i.e. cystic fibrosis, otitis media, endocarditis, necrotizing fasciitis, dental caries, periodontal diseases) have biofilms as an integral part of their pathogenesis. Of importance with respect to medicine, biofilms are more resistant to antibiotics. It is thus essential to learn the mechanisms that promote their resistance to develop novel strategies to treat biofilm infections. The originality and innovation of my research program lie in investigating microbial self-destruction as an effective anti-biofilm strategy. My research program is driven by the fundamental question of the role of genetically encoded bacterial cell death pathways and persistence of biofilm infections. From an applied perspective, the results of my research may lead to the development of novel strategies to control and exploit the biofilm phenomenon in medicine. Because of its scope and application-oriented, my research has the potential to yield major health benefits and contribute to the development of cost-effective treatments for biofilm infections.",5 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=171606&lang=en
171609,The impact of co-morbidity on cognition and behaviour in adults and children with Gilles de la Tourette syndrome,O'Connor  Kieron P,"O'Connor, Kieron P; Lavoie, Marc E",Centre de recherche Institut universitaire en sant&eacute; mentale de Montr&eacute;al,Qu&eacute;bec,Canada,200809,442622.0,Operating Grant,Operating Grants,Clinical,"Neurosciences, Mental Health and Addiction",Chronic Tic Disorder; Cognitive-Behavioral Therapy; Gilles De La Tourette Syndrome; Motor Processing; Obsessive-Compulsive Disorder; Psychophysiology,"Although Gilles de la Tourette syndrome (TS) is characterized by tics and diagnosed by the presence of tics, it is frequently accompanied by other behavioral problems such as obsessional compulsions and hyperactivity. These associated problems, termed comorbities, differ in children and adults and can be extremely disruptive to treatment response.
     Our research aims in this current grant demand, in continuity with our previous research, address the impact of comorbidity on the clinical status of TS. In a previous CIHR funded project we focused on the impact of TS with and without OCD as a comorbid disorder. In the present demand we explore similar questions related to a common but understudied comorbidity, namely hyperactivity. We examine how both children and adults diagnosed as TS with/without hyperactivity differ in terms of thinking, feeling, physiological responding symptomatology and treatment compliance. 
     A group of 40 adults with TS plus hyperactivity and 40 TS without hyperactivity will be recruited and assessed on neurocognitive function, clinical symptoms, psychosocial and interpersonal/family functioning. All participants will be offered a 14 week cognitive behavioral treatment (CBT) program. A group of 40 children with and without hyperactivity will also be assessed and will receive an adapted version of our empirically validated CBT program. All participants will be retested on all measures post-treatment to monitor treatment response and the impact of treatment on function.
     The results will help us answer clinical questions related to comorbidity such as which problem to treat first and how does treating one comorbid problem impact on other problems. Analyses will compare the impact of hyperactivity on the clinical status in children and adults, so letting us chart the evolution of the problems from child to adulthood, and offer guidelines on dealing with the impact of comorbidity on treatment outcome in different age groups.",4 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=171609&lang=en
171615,Insights into the molecular mechanism of rhomboid intramembrane peptidases,Lemieux  Joanne M,"Lemieux, Joanne M",University of Alberta,Alberta,Canada,200809,658665.0,Operating Grant,Operating Grants,Biomedical,Genetics,Enzymology; Intramembrane Peptidase; Membrane Protein Biochemistry; Saxs; X-Ray Crystallography,"The membrane bilayer provides a partition between intracellular and extracellular compartments of organelles and cells. Membrane proteases have evolved to allow transfer of information across this partition. Rhomboid intramembrane proteases (named for a Drosophila mutant phenotype) are enzymes located within the lipid bilayer of cells. By cleaving the peptide bond of another membrane protein, they release soluble factors that can act in signalling events. They are novel in that the enzyme carries out its function in the lipid environment as opposed to the intracellular compartments with traditional well-characterized soluble proteases. 

Rhomboid proteases are found in all living organisms. They play diverse roles in signalling. In bacterial systems, they assist in regulating cell populations and therefore are important regulators of infection. Rhomboids play a role in human malaria by facilitating parasite invasion. In human cells, rhomboid assists in preventing cell death. Defects in rhomboid proteases are associated with autosomal dominant hereditary blindness, Type II diabetes, and epithelial cancers such as those associated with the breast, head and neck.

Using structural techniques such as X-ray crystallography, cryo-electron microscopy, solution small angle scattering along with traditional biochemistry, we aim to uncover the important details of this novel protease family with diverse yet significant functions in human disease.",5 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=171615&lang=en
171620,Insights into the molecular mechanism of rhomboid intramembrane peptidases,Lemieux  Joanne M,"Lemieux, Joanne M",University of Alberta,Alberta,Canada,200809,300000.0,CIHR New Investigator,Salary Programs,Biomedical,Genetics,Enzymology; Intramembrane Peptidase; Membrane Protein Biochemistry; Saxs; X-Ray Crystallography,"The membrane bilayer provides a partition between intracellular and extracellular compartments of organelles and cells. Membrane proteases have evolved to allow transfer of information across this partition. Rhomboid intramembrane proteases (named for a Drosophila mutant phenotype) are enzymes located within the lipid bilayer of cells. By cleaving the peptide bond of another membrane protein, they release soluble factors that can act in signalling events. They are novel in that the enzyme carries out its function in the lipid environment as opposed to the intracellular compartments with traditional well-characterized soluble proteases. 

Rhomboid proteases are found in all living organisms. They play diverse roles in signalling. In bacterial systems, they assist in regulating cell populations and therefore are important regulators of infection. Rhomboids play a role in human malaria by facilitating parasite invasion. In human cells, rhomboid assists in preventing cell death. Defects in rhomboid proteases are associated with autosomal dominant hereditary blindness, Type II diabetes, and epithelial cancers such as those associated with the breast, head and neck.

Using structural techniques such as X-ray crystallography, cryo-electron microscopy, solution small angle scattering along with traditional biochemistry, we aim to uncover the important details of this novel protease family with diverse yet significant functions in human disease.",5 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=171620&lang=en
171625,Shaping the euchromatic and heterochromatic landscapes by p400 complex-mediated incorporation of H2A.Z within chromatin,Gaudreau  Luc R,"Gaudreau, Luc R",Universit&eacute; de Sherbrooke,Qu&eacute;bec,Canada,200809,756770.0,Operating Grant,Operating Grants,Biomedical,Genetics,Cancer; Chromatin; Gene Expression; Gene Transcription; Genetics; H2a.Z,"How genes are regulated is a major step in defining differences amongst all living organisms, and improper regulation of genes can also lead to cancer development. There is overwhelming evidence suggesting that regulators of gene expression are involved in cancer development when mutations alter their normal function. Our research group is interested in the study of components that regulate the expression of genes but more so in a global fashion such as to maintain the integrity of the human genome.  It is expected that our research will generate fundamental knowledge as to the implication of chromatin components in cancer progression.",5 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=171625&lang=en
171627,Autism Spectrum Disorders: Pathways to Better Outcomes (Phase II),Szatmari  Peter,"Szatmari, Peter; Bryson, Susan E; Fombonne, Eric",McMaster University,Ontario,Canada,200809,1712750.0,Operating Grant,Operating Grants,Clinical,"Human Development, Child and Youth Health",Autism Spectrum Disorders; Developmental Trajectories; Longitudinal Analysis,"The Autism Spectrum Disorders (ASD) include autistic disorder (AD), Asperger syndrome (AS), and PDDNOS and affect roughly 1 in 165 children. Based on prevalence, cost of services, reduced quality of life and outcome, the ASD's represent a major public health problem for Canada and research is urgently needed to develop cost-effective interventions in the middle childhood years. To facilitate that research, it is imperative to understand the different developmental pathways that ASD children follow and to identify predictors of good outcome that can be used to develop new intervention programs.
We have recently finished collecting data on a study of developmental pathways of ASD children from the point of diagnosis until the end of grade 1. In this application (Phase II) we propose to continue the investigation of the developmental pathways of children with ASD and their families by collecting additional information from grade 2 to grade 5 using many of the same measures but also some new ones as well. Our general hypothesis is that in some children, the improvements seen in social and communication competence and family well-being we saw prior to school entry will begin to slow down or decrease as the stresses of school accumulate. Similarly, clinically significant problems in mental health will begin to increase. We also wish to obtain baseline estimates of school achievement and adaptation so that we can start to chart this outcome into adolescence and eventually adulthood. 
Parents of children with ASD are desperate to know their child's future and what they can do to maximize the chances of a good outcome. Right now, we can tell them very little about the factors associated with optimal outcomes. This project was designed to fill important evidence gaps on the developmental pathways of children with ASD and to help clinicians, parents and policy makers understand the unique needs of this population of vulnerable children.",5 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=171627&lang=en
171629,Molecular mechanisms of T cell tolerance by dendritic cells in type 1 diabetes,Amrani  Abdelaziz,"Amrani, Abdelaziz",Universit&eacute; de Sherbrooke,Qu&eacute;bec,Canada,200809,386892.0,Operating Grant,Operating Grants,Biomedical,Infection and Immunity,Dendritic Cells; Flow Cytometry; Immunohistochemistry; T Helper And Tregs; Type 1 Diabetes; Western Blot,"Specialized cells of the immune system, T lymphocytes, have been trained to discriminate between harmless proteins of our own tissues, self-proteins, and dangerous proteins from pathogen agents. This discrimination process establishes that our own proteins pose no threat to the body; essentially we become 'tolerant' of self-proteins. One of the ways in which self-tolerance is maintained relies on the presence of a distinct population of T lymphocytes whose primary role is to prevent responses to self-tissues, the regulatory T cells. The regulatory T cells patrol the immune system and hold in check any T lymphocyte that might try to attack self-proteins (autoreactive T lymphocyte). This regulation is very important in preventing autoimmune diseases such as type 1 diabetes. In type 1 diabetes, insulin-producing cells, pancreatic islet beta cells, are killed by autoreactive T lymphocytes. It has been reported that regulatory T cells are potent at blocking diabetes development and generated with special stimulatory cells called dendritic cells. We used non-obese diabetic (NOD), a mouse model that spontaneously develops type 1 diabetes which in many respects closely resembles the human disease, and found that treatment with growth factor termed GM-CSF (Granulocytes macrophage-Colony Stimulating Factor) protects from diabetes. This protection from diabetes was associated with increased number of a population of dendritic cells that produced less inflammatory molecules and promote expansion of regulatory T cells. We also found that this population of dendritic cells was required for the protection from diabetes. The current proposal seeks to study in great detail molecular mechanisms that regulate the DCs work and what signals are needed for DCs to switch on regulatory T cells. A better understanding of DCs functions will help us design drugs that will promote regulatory activity in individuals that are predisposed to autoimmune disease, particularly type 1 diabetes.",3 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=171629&lang=en
171638,Neurocognitive and neuroimaging markers of remission in first episode psychosis,Lepage  Martin,"Lepage, Martin; Malla, Ashok K",CIUSSS de l'Ouest-de-l'Ile-de-Montr&eacute;al-Douglas Hospital,Qu&eacute;bec,Canada,200809,639300.0,Operating Grant,Operating Grants,Clinical,"Neurosciences, Mental Health and Addiction",Brain Imaging; Magnetic Resonance Imaging; Neurocognition; Predictors Of Outcome; Prefrontal Cortex; Schizophrenia,"People with a first episode of psychosis exhibit substantial heterogeneity with respect to severity and course over time. In the summer of 2004 and following the award of a CIHR operating grant we initiated a large longitudinal study on neurocognitive and neuroimaging markers of clinical outcome following a first episode of psychosis. The first objective of this study was to characterize from clinical, neurocognitive, and neuroimaging perspectives this cohort of patients at the time of initial presentation. A second objective consisted in the exploration of the predictive value of neurocognitive and neuroimaging measures in determining short-term response to treatment. Response to treatment is only the first step in the journey towards remission and eventual recovery or lack thereof. Therefore, as part of this renewal we propose to pursue this unique longitudinal study involving an already well characterized large FEP patient cohort for understanding predictors of variations in remission and functional recovery. We propose to focus our effort on markers of remission at 1 and 2 years. Considering that we have an extremely well characterized FEP that has been followed already for a significant portion of time, we will extend our follow up by adding a new time point 4 years post baseline.  Identifying the early neurocognitive and neuroimaging markers of full remission on the one hand and the progressive changes that may occur over time in non-remitted patients following a first episode of psychosis may facilitate early identification of patients with poor prognosis and provide data for future development of different biological and psychosocial treatment approaches in the early course of the illness.",5 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=171638&lang=en
171643,Basal forebrain regulation of sleep-wake state.,Semba  Kazue,"Semba, Kazue",Dalhousie University (Nova Scotia),Nova Scotia,Canada,200809,721560.0,Operating Grant,Operating Grants,Biomedical,"Neurosciences, Mental Health and Addiction",And C-Fos; Eeg/Emg Recording And Microinfusion In Rats; Glutamtae Microelectrode And Stimulation In Vivo; Immunohistochemistry; In Vitro Electrophysiology; Neurotransmitters And Neuromodulators; Sleep Deprivation; Tracing,"Sleep and wake are fundamental biological processes present in virtually all species of animals. Yet we still do not fully understand what mechanisms regulate sleep/wake states. To address this question, we focus our research on the part of the brain called the basal forebrain. The basal forebrain is known for its critical role in activating the cortex, the part of the brain responsible for ""higher"" brain functions such as perception and planning. Recently, we showed that the basal forebrain also plays an important role in promoting sleep after sleep loss; damage to this region in rodents can impair their ability to compensate for lost sleep. The execution of these functions by the basal forebrain requires appropriate and timely inputs from the rest of the sleep/wake system, and the basal forebrain's ability to monitor and signal sleep need to specific targets. In the proposed research, we will investigate how various types of inputs from the rest of the sleep/wake system modulate the activity of specific basal forebrain cells to induce behavioural and cortical activation. We will also examine how these multiple signals interact and whether there are functional changes in the inputs after sleep deprivation. Finally, we will investigate how basal forebrain cells monitor sleep need and signal to the rest of the brain to initiate compensatory sleep. Towards these goals, we will use polygraphic sleep-wake state recording, infusion of wake-promoting transmitters, a selective neurotoxin, and cellular recordings from brain slices. Understanding sleep-wake regulation can have significant health and economic impact, as inadequate sleep is becoming more common in our society. It is our hope that the research proposed here will ultimately help in the development of better strategies for improving the quality of sleep and for coping with the negative impact of inadequate sleep.",5 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=171643&lang=en
171649,The molecular basis for directed outgrowth of pioneer and follower axons in C. elegans,Hutter  Harald,"Hutter, Harald","Simon Fraser University (Burnaby, B.C.)",British Columbia,Canada,200809,664970.0,Operating Grant,Operating Grants,Biomedical,Genetics,Defects In Human Brain Development; Formation Of Neuronal Circuits; Genetics; Neuronal Development,"A large number of mental disorders in humans are suspected to have underlying connectivity problems in the brain, but in most cases the nature of the defect remains to be defined. Connections among neurons are established during embryogenesis. They are made after neuronal processes (axons and dendrites) have navigated precisely towards their target areas where they establish synaptic connections with target cells. The entire process of axonal navigation and synaptic partner selection is only partly understood. The first neurons sending out their processes, called pioneers, provide an initial scaffold, which is used by later outgrowing axons for their navigation. The molecular basis for pioneer-dependent navigation of follower axons is largely unknown. 
In this proposal we plan to continue the molecular characterization of several genes identified in our lab affecting navigation of pioneer and follower axons. We use the nematode C. elegans to characterise the cellular function of these genes. Two of them are members of the cadherin superfamily, which are evolutionary conserved and found in vertebrates as well, so that our work will also shed light on the molecular control of this process in vertebrates and humans. To get a more complete understanding of the entire process we plan to identify additional genes involved through genetic screens.
A detailed understanding of the molecular basis of axonal navigation ultimately will help to understand the basis of a number of neuronal diseases in humans, which have a developmental origin.",5 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=171649&lang=en
171662,Primary prevention of asthma:  The impact of the multifaceted intervention program in early life on outcomes in teenagers,Becker  Allan B,"Becker, Allan B; Chan-Yeung, Moira",University of Manitoba,Manitoba,Canada,200809,525702.0,Operating Grant,Operating Grants,Biomedical,Circulatory and Respiratory Health,Allergy; Asthma; Children; Environment; Primary Prevention,"We undertook a multifaceted intervention program during the last trimester of pregnancy and the first twelve months of life in children at high risk for the development of asthma, based on a strong family history.  This intervention during a ""window of opportunity"" in early life had a significant impact in follow-up at 1, 2 and 7 years of age for its ability to decrease asthma.  We ask whether this early life intervention will continue to have impact in children in their teenage years.  We will assess the progress of asthma in this group of children, measure the degree of airway responsiveness and presence of allergy and evaluate the impact of gender differences over time.  We believe that early life and current psychosocial stressors will have impact on the clinical, physiologic, and immune status of these teenagers.",3 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=171662&lang=en
171663,An Integrated Approach to Blood Biomarker Discoveries in Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease.,Man  S.F. Paul,"Man, S.F. Paul; Sin, Donald",University of British Columbia,British Columbia,Canada,200809,367795.0,Operating Grant,Operating Grants,Social / Cultural / Environmental / Population Health,Population and Public Health,Community Based Cohort; Copd Biomarkers; Population Base; Translational Research,"Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease is a very common chronic disease with huge societal and personal impact. This study will provide an integrated approach to create a bank of biomarkers (simple blood tests) so that we can identify those who will most likely suffer from this condition, and also ways to monitor drug therapy.",3 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=171663&lang=en
171664,Les facteurs biopsychosociaux impliqués dans l'évolution du trouble du sommeil associé au travail de nuit.,Vallieres  Annie,"Vallieres, Annie",Universit&eacute; Laval,Qu&eacute;bec,Canada,200809,240000.0,Operating Grant,Operating Grants,Clinical,"Neurosciences, Mental Health and Addiction",Facteurs Biopsychosociaux; Psychologie De La Santé; Recherches Cliniques Observationnelles; Travail De Nuit; Troubles Du Sommeil,"Selon une étude récente, 14% des travailleurs de nuit et 8% des travailleurs à horaire rotatif souffrent du trouble du sommeil associé à leur horaire de travail. Des conséquences négatives importantes, tant pour le travailleur que pour la société, découlent de ce problème; elles peuvent être associées à l'augmentation du risque de dépression, de morbidité et d'ulcères gastriques ainsi qu'à une augmentation de l'absentéisme et du nombre d'accidents au travail. Ces difficultés de sommeil s'expliquent principalement par le fait que l'horaire de travail amène les travailleurs de nuit à dormir au moment où leur horloge biologique favorise l'éveil. Récemment, il a été suggéré que des facteurs psychologiques, comme la présence de symptômes dépressifs, ou des facteurs sociaux, telle que la satisfaction conjugale, jouent un rôle dans l'évolution de ces difficultés. Alors que plusieurs auteurs soutiennent l'importance de ces facteurs psychosociaux aggravant le dérèglement de l'horloge biologique et augmentant la sévérité du trouble du sommeil, aune étude n'a tenté de les identifier et d'en faire des cibles de traitement. Quelle est l'influence de ces facteurs sur les conséquences négatives du travail de nuit? Y a-t-il une vulnérabilité qui prédispose certaines personnes à développer des difficultés de sommeil lorsqu'elles travaillent de nuit? Y a-t-il des comportements ou des facteurs environnementaux qui favorisent une meilleure adaptation au travail de nuit? Le projet vise à répondre à ces questions en étudiant le sommeil, l'éveil et l'état psychologique du travailleur de nuit à horaire fixe et rotatif avec ou sans difficulté de sommeil. Les résultats de cette étude fourniront de nouvelles informations quant à la compréhension du développement et du maintien des difficultés de sommeil chez cette population nocturne. Le but est de développer des plans de prévention et des interventions efficaces pour aider les travailleurs de nuit à mieux vivre avec leur horaire de travail.",4 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=171664&lang=en
171666,The role of human glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase in reactivating oxidized forms of the DNA repair enzyme APE1,Ramotar  Dindial,"Ramotar, Dindial",CIUSSS Est-de-l'Ile-de- Montr&eacute;al-Maisonneuve Rosemont,Qu&eacute;bec,Canada,200809,355206.0,Operating Grant,Operating Grants,Clinical,Cancer Research,Cell Biology; Dna Repair; Neurological Diseases; Oxidative Dna Damage; Oxidized Proteins; Protein-Protein Interactions,"Project summary:
Reactive oxygen species are highly unstable molecules and are produced, e.g., by mitochondrial respiration and activated
neutrophils. These reactive oxygen species can attack and destroy various cellular macromolecules such as proteins or
enzymes to cause functional inactivation, thereby leading to several human disorders, such as amyotrophic lateral sclerosis,
Down's syndrome, and Alzheimer's disease.
Previous research: (What has been done already?)
We discovered that the protein GAPDH can form an association with the DNA repair enzyme APE1, which functions to
maintain the integrity of the genome. We show that GAPDH converts the inactive form of APE1, that is, the oxidized APE1
caused by reactive oxygen species, to the active form that is needed to repair damaged DNA. Reducing the level of GAPDH
decreased the activity of APE1 and caused the DNA to accumulate lesions. Such lesions if not repaired can initiate the
formation of cancer cells.
Project description: (What is being studied and how the study will be conducted?)
We believe that GAPDH has the ability to maintian the redox state of a key DNA repair enzyme APE1. We plan to show that inactivated APE1 is unable to process in vivo DNA lesions and therefore causes a range of biological consequences. 
Impact and relevance: (How will our studies help?)
We predict that GAPDH may act to protect APE1 protein which is susceptible to reactive oxygen species-induced
structural damage. We believe that this is required in neurodegenerative diseases such that it prevents accumulation of genotoxic lesions that could trigger cell death.  Moreover,
defects in GAPDH function might serve to predict individuals who are at risk of developing cancers",3 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=171666&lang=en
171677,"Somatic and Psychological Symptom Focus in Asian-Canadians: The Role of Cultural and Individual Differences in the Psychopathology, Assessment, and Treatment of Depression",Ryder  Andrew G,"Ryder, Andrew G",Centre for Addiction and Mental Health (Toronto),Ontario,Canada,200809,300000.0,CIHR New Investigator,Salary Programs,Social / Cultural / Environmental / Population Health,"Neurosciences, Mental Health and Addiction",Alexithymia; Culture; Depression; East Asian; Quantitative; Somatization,"East Asians in Canada are often stereotyped as a model minority, with few psychosocial difficulties. The reality is that mental health problems in this population are underestimated and often treated inadequately. This problem has serious implications, both for the health of East Asian Canadians and also for the social and economic well-being of the country.

Recent research in East Asia and Canada has demonstrated that Euro-Canadians are more likely to present psychological symptoms such as depressed mood, whereas East Asians are more likely to present somatic symptoms such as fatigue. As a result, Western-trained clinicians in Canada are more likely to under-diagnose depression, with consequences for treatment and for the prospects of recovery. What is not clear, at present, is why these cultural differences are observed.

This project aspires to go beyond simple descriptions of cultural variation in an effort to unpack the underlying reasons for these different symptom emphases. In particular, these studies will examine the ways in which cultural values, beliefs, and assumptions shape one's focus of thinking - either internally, on one's on thoughts and feelings or externally, on other people and on social groups. Focus of thinking, in turn, is thought to influence the symptoms that depressed individuals focus on and find most distressing.

Understanding the reasons why East Asians and Euro-Canadians tend to emphasize different symptoms while depressed will not only improve the ability of Canadian clinicians to conduct more accurate assessments of depression in East Asians, but will also help us to develop culturally-sensitive therapies. The result will be quicker and more effective intervention, reducing the burden of depression on the patient, the family, and Canadian society as a whole.",5 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=171677&lang=en
171685,Deciphering novel roles for the acetyltransferase NuA4 in genome stability.,Baetz  Kristin K,"Baetz, Kristin K",University of Ottawa,Ontario,Canada,200809,334071.0,Operating Grant,Operating Grants,Biomedical,Genetics,Chromosome Stability; Functional Genomics And Genetics; Lysine Acetyltransferase; Proteomics; Septins Organization; Spindle Pole Body And Microtubule Dynamics,"Project Summary: Every time a cell divides, it must accurately distribute one copy of each duplicated chromosome (DNA) to each daughter cell. Errors that cause cells to gain or lose chromosome, chromosome imbalance, is a hallmark of and a likely cause of cancer.  Dr. Baetz's laboratory uses the simple model organism yeast to identify and characterize proteins that are essential for maintaining chromosome balance. 

Previous Research:  The powerful techniques available in yeast has allowed for the Baetz laboratory to systematic assess the role of each yeast gene in chromosome stability.  This lead to the identification of an enzyme complex named NuA4 which when mutated,  resulted in dramatic loss of chromosomes.  

Project Description: The NuA4 complex regulates the functions of ""target"" proteins by the addition of small chemical modification call an ""acetyl"" group.  Presently the ""target"" proteins of NuA4 are largely unknown. In order to begin to understand how NuA4 is regulating chromosome copy numbers, the Baetz laboratory is attempting to identify new targets of NuA4.  Once targets are identified, they will asses if these are the important targets in maintaining chromosome stability. 
 
Impact and Relevance:  The yeast NuA4 complex is remarkably similar to the human NuA4 complex which has been implicated in numerous cancer types.  Therefore, discoveries that the Baetz lab can quickly make in yeast will provide insights into the role human NuA4 plays in cancer progression.  Increasing our knowledge of genes that prevent chromosome imbalance will significantly advance our understanding of cancer and help in the development of effective new treatments for the disease",3 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=171685&lang=en
171692,"A novel pathway of PI(3,4)P2/PI(3,4,5)P3 production initiated by a bacterial phosphatase",Brumell  John H,"Brumell, John H",Hospital for Sick Children (Toronto),Ontario,Canada,200809,351642.0,Operating Grant,Operating Grants,Biomedical,Infection and Immunity,Confocal Microscopy; Lipid Biochemistry; Membrane Trafficking; Phosphoinositide Signaling; Pi3-Kinase; Salmonella Infection,"Some bacteria have the remarkable ability to invade our cells and replicate within them during infection.  Such bacteria use special toxins to alter the control systems of our cells.  These toxins cause drastic changes to the membranes of our cells, forcing them to internalize the bacteria and in the process providing them with a specialized compartment that allows the microorganisms to replicate inside our cells.  Salmonella, best known for its ability to cause 'food poisoning', is one type of bacteria that can parasitize our cells in this manner.  In this study we will examine how a Salmonella toxin, called SopB, can alter cellular membranes to invade our cells.  The membrane alterations caused by SopB are related to those that occur during other human diseases, including cancer, bipolar disorder and Type 2 diabetes.  Therefore these studies will provide a new fundamental understanding not only of bacterial infection but also of other human diseases, possibly allowing the development of new treatments.",3 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=171692&lang=en
171695,Functional amyloid formation by the chaplins of Streptomyces coelicolor,Elliot  Marie A,"Elliot, Marie A",McMaster University,Ontario,Canada,200809,586655.0,Operating Grant,Operating Grants,Biomedical,Infection and Immunity,Amyloid Fibre Formation; Protein Localization; Protein Secretion; Protein-Protein Interactions; Sortase; Streptomyces Development,"'Amyloids' are organized aggregations of proteins that are often associated with diseases like Alzheimer's, Parkinson's, and
rheumatoid arthritis. It had long been thought that amyloid formation was the result of interactions between proteins that had
folded incorrectly, and that these interactions were toxic to cells. New research, however, is showing that not all amyloids
are toxic, and that there exist 'functional amyloids'. These functional protein aggregates appear to play important roles in a
wide variety of biological systems, including skin pigmentation and microbial development/pathogenesis. Our work focuses
upon on one class of functional amyloids found in the bacterium Streptomyces coelicolor. The 'chaplin' proteins of S.
coelicolor interact to form amyloid fibres on the bacterial cell surface, and are critical for bacterial development. We are
working to understand how chaplin interaction is controlled, as it is thought that precise regulation of expression and
aggregation is a key factor in determining whether an amyloid is functional or toxic.",5 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=171695&lang=en
171701,"Psychometric testing of a new scale measuring medical outcomes of dysphagia (MOD) in adult patients with swallowing disorders secondary to stroke, cervical spine abnormalities and head and neck cancer",Martino  Rosemary,"Martino, Rosemary; Streiner, David L",University of Toronto,Ontario,Canada,200809,430461.0,Operating Grant,Operating Grants,Clinical,Aging,Adults; Dysphagia; Lung; Measurement; Nutrition-Hydration; Psychological,"Swallowing disorders (dysphagia) are common in adult patients. There is emerging evidence that dysphagia itself can cause adverse medical outcomes. There is a three-fold increased risk for pneumonia in these patients versus similar patients without dysphagia. Patients with dysphagia also suffer poor nutrition and dehydration. Patients can become so malnourished that it slows their recovery. Dysphagia can cause choking when food or liquid enters the lungs. Over time, this will cause pneumonia and even death. More acutely, patients fear that their choking will cause them to suffocate and die. Over time, patients are embarrassed to be seen choking and thus feel forced to dine alone. These patients report feelings of isolation and depression. To date, there are no practical methods to assess these adverse outcomes of swallowing difficulties in patients. This research will be the first to address this gap. Specifically, as part of previous research (PhD dissertation by RM, the PI) a new measure of medical outcomes of dysphagia was developed, titled the Medical Outcomes of Dysphagia (MOD) scale. The MOD consists of 3 subscales that each measure lung, nutrition-hydration or psychological consequences in patients with swallowing difficulties. Unlike more expensive and complex tests, the MOD has been designed for both in- and outpatients. This research will validate each MOD subscale to ensure retention of only items that are reliable and valid for use with patients who have dysphagia due to stroke, cervical spine abnormalities or head and neck cancer. The final MOD subscales will be the first to allow clinicians to track medical complications in their patients and to ensure that treatment is effective. Globally, the MOD subscales will direct limited health care resources to the most effective treatments for swallowing disorders.",3 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=171701&lang=en
171702,A Longitudinal Study of Food Reward and Obesity in Young Children: The Role of Gene-Environment Interaction,Levitan  Robert D,"Levitan, Robert D",Centre for Addiction and Mental Health (Toronto),Ontario,Canada,200809,780390.0,Operating Grant,Operating Grants,Clinical,"Human Development, Child and Youth Health",Addiction; Dopamine; Food Reward; Genetics; Obesity; Overeating,"It is well established that an epidemic of obesity is well underway in developed countries around the world, with enormous costs at a personal, familial and societal level. Of particular concern is the rapid increase in obesity in children, which in Canada has tripled in frequency in recent decades. Efforts to prevent and treat obesity in general, and childhood obesity in particular, have fallen well short of established goals. It may be that current treatments are simply unable to override the basic evolutionary mechanisms underlying the consumption of palatable foods that have protected humans from starvation over millions of years. If so, identification of genetic variants and/or adversities that make children more sensitive to food reward should point the way to new prevention and treatment strategies established very early in life.

The goal of the current project is to examine how certain genes and/or adversities play a role in food reward processes and weight regulation in children 4-7 years of age. This proposal extends from a large CIHR-sponsored grant called Maternal Adversity, Vulnerability and Neurodevelopment (MAVAN), and from cutting edge work in adult overeating populations done by members of the current research team. It is anticipated that findings from this study will make a major contribution to the understanding, prevention and treatment of both childhood obesity and obesity in general.",5 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=171702&lang=en
171703,Chemical Genetic Profiling of Inositol Phosphate Signaling in Cancer,Miller  Gregory J,"Miller, Gregory J",McGill University,Qu&eacute;bec,Canada,200809,643730.0,Operating Grant,Operating Grants,Biomedical,Genetics,Cellular Signaling; Enzyme Mechanism; Inositol Phosphates; Second Messengers; X-Ray Crystallography,"Inositol phosphates (IPs) are signaling molecules that regulate many cellular functions. Over the past 2 decades, evidence has accumulated demonstrating IP profiles of cancer cells are distinct from profiles of normal cells and alterations of cellular IP profiles can beneficially impact the cancer phenotype. With clear and growing evidence that the IP profile of cells change with cell proliferation and modulation of this profile can control proliferation of cancer cells, we ask the question: What is the best way to target IP signaling to utilize these anti-cancer effects?
  Previous studies have revealed modulation of IP signaling promotes apoptosis and increases the effectiveness of anti-cancer drugs in numerous cultured cell and animal cancer models.  These studies have concentrated on IP6 as a pro-apoptotic signal and potential anti-cancer therapeutic. However, there is no strong evidence identifying IP6 as the direct, active agent. In fact, this idea is refuted by reports that over-production of IP6 in cells lead to the inhibition of apoptosis.  Clearly, the model of IP6 as a pro-apoptotic signal must be reevaluated.  To explore new approaches to modulate IP profiles and promote apoptosis, we hypothesize actions of IP kinases, which comprise the IP6-synthetic pathway, counteract pro-apoptosis signaling, and by inhibiting these kinases we can promote apoptosis and mimic the pro-apoptotic actions of IP6. Currently, there are no chemicals available to inhibit IP kinases and explore their roles cancer cells.  We propose to overcome this obstacle by engineering IP kinases, such that we can control their actions using chemicals.  This will provide valuable and novel insight into the IP signaling pathway and the roles of IP kinases in cancer.  Further, using this approach we can evaluate IP kinase inhibition as a route to sensitizing cells to apoptosis-inducing agents and increasing the efficacy of current anti-cancer therapeutics.",5 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=171703&lang=en
171705,Discovery of Estrogen Mediated Fat Depot Specific Genes: Implications for Obesity and Metabolic Syndrome,Sairam  M. R,"Sairam, M. R",Institut de recherches cliniques de Montr&eacute;al,Qu&eacute;bec,Canada,200809,352644.0,Operating Grant,Operating Grants,Biomedical,"Nutrition, Metabolism and Diabetes",Adipocytes; Adipokines; Aging; Gene Changes & Cloning; Inflammation; Sex Hormone Imbalances,"As obesity accounts for nearly 80% of type II diabetes, a disease that particularly affects an aging population it is important to understand mechanisms that lead to expansion of the bursting bulge. In particular, deposition of fat in the abdominal area is a high risk factor for cardiovascular disease, diabetes and cancer during aging. This risk becomes greater in women after menopause when they lose some regulatory hormones like estrogens. In a genetically altered mouse that simulates sex hormonal imbalances prevailing during menopausal conditions we are able to explore genes and mechanisms that induce the so-called abdominal fatness. This model generated in Canada will be useful to investigate the relationship between early obesity and associated health adversities such as age related type II diabetes, lipid abnormalities, increase in blood pressure and cardiovascular risks that are collectively termed the ""Metabolic Syndrome"". Understanding the causes and revealing the role of new genes that we have discovered will help us define why fat tends to accumulate in certain depots in the body and the design of therapeutic interventions.",3 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=171705&lang=en
171708,COX-2 Pathway and Cardiovascular Disease,Funk  Colin D,"Funk, Colin D","Queen's University (Kingston, Ontario)",Ontario,Canada,200809,845001.0,Operating Grant,Operating Grants,Biomedical,Circulatory and Respiratory Health,Aortic Aneurysm; Cyclooxygenase; Inflammation; Mouse Models; Prostaglandin; Ultrasound Imaging,"Abdominal aortic aneurysm (AAA), an aberrant expansion of the largest blood vessel in the body, is a major cause of sudden death in the elderly population. This project seeks to understand the role of COX-2 and mPGES-1 proteins in the development of aortic aneurysms. Drugs known as COX-2 inhibitors such as Celebrex, Vioxx and Bextra were excellent for pain and inflammation control; unfortunately they also cause an increased risk of heart attack and stroke. Understanding the role of COX-2 and mPGES-1 in the AAA disease process, will aid the development of new drugs in the future to achieve similar pain and inflammation reduction without the cardiac risks. Currently there is no known treatment or prevention for abdominal aortic aneurysms. Our goals are to know more about the process of AAA formation and to find a possible therapy to manage the disease.",5 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=171708&lang=en
171709,Biochemistry and Biology of Cyclooxygenases,Funk  Colin D,"Funk, Colin D","Queen's University (Kingston, Ontario)",Ontario,Canada,200809,835660.0,Operating Grant,Operating Grants,Biomedical,Circulatory and Respiratory Health,Cyclooxygenase; Endothelium; Induced Mutant Mouse Models; Platelet; Prostacyclin; Vascular Biology,"Heart attacks and strokes are often caused by a series of events starting with the disruption of fatty plaques on the inner lining of blood vessel arteries. Subsequently, one of the main events is the clumping of tiny cells termed platelets along the exposed plaque within a blood vessel artery that supplies blood and oxygen to either the heart or brain. Platelets are required for the normal stoppage of blood flow when cuts and injuries occur. However, when they clump together in an uncontrolled manner within an artery the consequences can be devastating. There are two proteins COX-1 and COX-2 within the human body that control the production of two fat-derived molecules known as thromboxane and prostacyclin. These substances regulate how platelets clump together. We do not know exactly where and when COX-2 is found within blood vessels and during the process when platelets are made. We will study a specially designed mouse with a fluorescent COX-2 protein to examine where it is found. Novel mouse strains in which the two COX forms are exchanged will also allow us to investigate how the two proteins function to control platelet clumping when a blood vessel is injured. A special microscope technique can be used to visualize blood vessels in live mice and to follow the developing clump of platelets (thrombus). We will use innovative techniques (gene and cell therapy) to deliver prostacyclin so as to prevent or limit the damage when a thrombus forms. This research is important because it will help us to understand the basic mechanisms of thrombus formation and how the two COX proteins function, which may lead to new treatments for cardiovascular disease.",5 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=171709&lang=en
171714,Pharmacokinetic modeling: Validation of DCE-MRI and PET/MRI combination,Lepage  Martin,"Lepage, Martin",Universit&eacute; de Sherbrooke,Qu&eacute;bec,Canada,200809,306240.0,Operating Grant,Operating Grants,Biomedical,Cancer Research,Mri; Mri/Pet Combination; Pet; Pharmacokinetic Modeling; Validation,"Pharmacokinetic modeling is used to characterize the environment of tumours. First, images are acquired using either
magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) or positron emission tomography (PET), a compound detectable by these imaging
modalities is injected to the subject and images are acquired as a function of time following the injection. Pharmacokinetic
models analyze these images and extract information about the blood volume, the perfusion of tumours, the ""leakiness"" of
the blood vessels and so on. Some of these measures are used in the clinic to help diagnose which tumour will respond to
which treatment. However, we intend to validate that the values found by the pharmacokinetic models are truly
representative of the tumour micro-environment, as we have reasons to believe that although these values are influenced by
the micro-environment, the models and the acquisition protocols could be improved to provide more physiologically
meaningful values.
We thus propose a series of experiments on a controlled system that will also be simulated using fluid dynamics theory.
This will serve as a benchmark onto which the measures will be calibrated. We will then optimize the data acquisition
protocol of MRI in order to best match the results in the control system. Then, we will combine the models used in MRI and
in PET such that the quality of the information obtained by both imaging modalities one after the other will both be improved.
Many clinical systems are being developed to perform MRI and PET simultaneously, our work will provide a solid base for
the analysis of these novel data.",3 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=171714&lang=en
171720,The interaction of fetal development and genotype in determining neurocognitive development,Meaney  Michael J,"Meaney, Michael J; Kennedy, James L; Seguin, Jean R",CIUSSS de l'Ouest-de-l'Ile-de-Montr&eacute;al-Douglas Hospital,Qu&eacute;bec,Canada,200809,861655.0,Operating Grant,Operating Grants,Biomedical,"Neurosciences, Mental Health and Addiction",Attention; Cognitive Development; Dopamine; Fetal Growth; Genetic Polymorphism; Prefrontal Cortex,"Clinical evidence suggests that the quality of fetal growth and development predicts the risk for attentional deficits in childhood.  This research project follow from these clinical studies as well as our preliminary evidence in a longitudinal study of children.  The research will examine how fetal development interacts with specific genetic variations to influence cognitive development, focusing on attentional systems.",5 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=171720&lang=en
171727,Genetic Susceptibility to Esophageal Cancer,Narod  Steven A,"Narod, Steven A",Women's College Hospital (Toronto),Ontario,Canada,200809,552132.0,Operating Grant,Operating Grants,Biomedical,Genetics,Copy Number Vairant; Esophageal Cancer; Genome; Hereditary; Single Nucleotide Polymorphism,"There is a region in Northern Iran which is known for a very high lifetime risk of cancer of the esophagus. Residents have a lifetime risk of esophageal cancer that is approximately one in seven- this is the highest risk in the world. We have previously shown that esophageal cancer in Iran has a strong hereditary component although the genes responsible for this are not known. In collaboration with the Center for Digestive Disease in Iran, and with the support of the CIHR, we have created the largest DNA bank in the world for esophageal cancer. We have DNA and clinical information on 700 cases of esophageal cancer and 1500 unaffected ethnic-matched controls. We will use modern technology to do a genome-wide search to identify genes. We will use the Illumina Human610 beadchip to study 500 cases and 500 controls. SNP genotyping data on these samples will be analyzed for comparing SNP frequencies as well as copy number variant (CNV) identification in cases and controls. We will also determine the run of homozygosities (ROH) using SNP genotyping data and determine regions of ROH which are significantly more frequent in cases. We will then validate identified SNPs and CNVs in another set of 400 cases and 800 controls. Finally we will directly sequence the regions identified by associated SNPs, CNVs and ROHs to determine deleterious alleles predispose to esophageal cancer. We expect that this approach will allow us to identify the gene or genes responsible for the hereditary basis of esophageal cancer in Iran. This discovery may be important for the understanding of esophageal cancer in other countries.",3 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=171727&lang=en
171732,"Understanding ""Troponinitis"": Exploring Myocardial Injury, and its Clinical and Health Services Implications",Graham  Michelle M,"Graham, Michelle M",University of Alberta,Alberta,Canada,200809,162000.0,Operating Grant,Operating Grants,Clinical,Health Services and Policy Research,Acute Myocardial Infarction; Cardiovascular Disease; Outcomes; Process Of Care,"Doctors use symptoms (eg chest discomfort, and), electrocardiograms, and bloodwork (with Troponins, which are very specific to heart tissue) to diagnose heart attacks.  However, bloodwork does have drawbacks, and many patients who are not diagnosed with heart attacks still have elevated troponin levels.  These patients are often cared for in hospital areas other than Cardiology.  This is a diverse group of patients, including those with a traditional heart attack, but who have other significant health problems (such as a terminal cancer or severe dementia which interfere with standard treatments).  Others have a heart attack after an operation.  An elevation in troponin can also be due to another stress (such as severe infection, blood clot in the lung, dangerously high or low blood pressure, anemia or trauma).  Furthermore, patients with severe kidney disease can have elevated troponins.  As a whole, this diverse group of patients has not been well studied, and optimal treatment is not clear.  We plan to study all patients with elevated troponin levels who have been admitted to hospital areas other than cardiac wards.  We will determine the clinical features, investigations, treatment received, and outcomes of these patients.  We want to compare these patients to those with traditional heart attacks who are admitted to cardiology wards.  We believe that patients admitted to other services have more medical conditions, and will have less consistency of care in terms of tests and treatments.  We plan to identify patients who will benefit from conventional heart attack therapies, and also those patients where these therapies may cause harm, in order to improve the overall care of all patients with elevated troponin levels.  These same principles may also be applicable to other medical conditions that are not always treated in specialty areas, such as congestive heart failure, lung disease, and gastrointestinal bleeding.",3 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=171732&lang=en
171733,Characterization of susceptibility variants for rheumatoid arthritis,Siminovitch  Katherine A,"Siminovitch, Katherine A",Sinai Health System (Toronto),Ontario,Canada,200809,872020.0,Operating Grant,Operating Grants,Clinical,Musculoskeletal Health and Arthritis,Genetic Association Analysis; Inflammation; Lymphocyte Activation; Rheumatoid Arthritis,"This proposal is aimed at identification of the genes/proteins which confer susceptibility to rheumatoid arthritis (RA). RA is a chronic inflammatory disease in which the tissues lining the joints become severely inflamed and ultimately damaged. As a result most patients experience systemic illness and chronic pain and disability, requiring frequent hospitalizations and surgical interventions. At present treatment of RA is far from satisfactory, such therapy often being unsuccessful and/or associated with considerable toxicity. Development of better treatment or preventive strategies in RA has been impeded by lack of understanding of the basic cause(s) of this disease. However, a major role for genetic factors in development of RA is widely recognized. The goal of this proposal is to identify these genetic factors using DNA markers to compare RA patient gene status with that of healthy controls. We have already identified several regions of the genome which appear to harbor RA risk genes. We will now characterize these regions in detail so as to pinpoint the gene lesions causing RA. Once identified, the susceptibility genes and the proteins they encode will be studied for their effect on disease risk as well as severity and outcome. We will also focus on characterizing the molecular pathways linking one known RA risk variant to disease. These data will pave the way for earlier diagnosis, improved therapy and, ultimately, prevention of RA.",5 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=171733&lang=en
171735,Structure-function studies of methionine recyclying enzymes,Howell  Patricia L,"Howell, Patricia L",Hospital for Sick Children (Toronto),Ontario,Canada,200809,839900.0,Operating Grant,Operating Grants,Biomedical,Genetics,Anti-Microbial Drug Design; Methionine Recycling; Site-Directed Mutagenesis; Structure-Based Drug Design; X-Ray Crystallogrpahy,"Enzymes are a particular class of proteins, which speed up chemical reactions that otherwise would not take place or take place very slowly.  They are found in all organisms in both the plant and animal kingdoms and are essential for the maintenance of life.  Knowing the structure of an enzyme and how the enzyme works has allowed novel drugs to be designed to combat AIDS.  We intend to use the same strategy, structure-based drug design, to design novel therapeutics to target two enzymes in the methionine recycling pathway: the dual substrate specific enzyme 5'-methylthioadenosine/
S-adenosylhomocysteine (MTA/SAH) nucleosidase and 5-methylthioribose (MTR) kinase. A difference exists in the way in which MTA, SAH and MTR are broken down in various organisms. MTA/SAH nucleosidase and MTR kinase are found in various bacteria and plants but are not present in humans.  Inhibitors of these enzymes therefore have the potential to be excellent antibiotics, selectively killing the infectious organism while leaving the human host unharmed.  The primary goals of the research outlined in this proposal are to determine detailed enzymatic mechanisms for MTA/SAH nucleosidase and MTR kinase using biochemical and biophysical techniques such as NMR and X-ray crystallography, and to use this understanding to develop novel specific inhibitors for both enzymes.",5 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=171735&lang=en
171746,Exploring the Arts as Knowledge Translation in Qualitative Research with Young People: The Early Psychosis Mural Project,Boydell  Katherine M,"Boydell, Katherine M",Hospital for Sick Children (Toronto),Ontario,Canada,200809,241160.0,Operating Grant,Operating Grants,Health systems / services,"Neurosciences, Mental Health and Addiction",Arts-Informed Research; First Episode Psychosis; Knowledge Exchange; Knowledge Translation; Mental Health In Schools; Qualitative Research,"This research will use an innovative knowledge translation strategy to bring research on first episode psychosis to students and educators in rural secondary schools in Ontario and PEI. The first phase of the research was CIHR funded and involved youth with psychosis working with an artist to create a mural. This mural documented their experiences of psychosis and the process of seeking help. The second phase, for which funding is sought, will involve construction of a multimedia installation of the mural (acrylic on canvas) and accompanying data (graffiti wall, photographs, artist statements) for display in schools. The objectives are to launch the mural in secondary schools to i) increase awareness, understanding and dialogue about psychosis and the help seeking process, and ii) document audience response to, and engagement with, the mural.",2 yrs 6 mths,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=171746&lang=en
171747,Transformation of normal to abnormal myocardium by diabetes mellitus: role of Rac1-mediated calpain activation,Peng  Tianqing,"Peng, Tianqing",London Health Sciences Centre Res. Inc. (Ont.),Ontario,Canada,200809,347740.0,Operating Grant,Operating Grants,Biomedical,Circulatory and Respiratory Health,Calpain; Cardiomyopathy; Diabetes; Myocardial Function; Nadph Oxidase; Rac1,"Diabetes is a disease. Patients' body with this disease can not properly utilize sugar (glucose). Thus, there is an increased concentration of sugar in blood of diabetic patients. There are two main types of this disease: type-1 and type-2 diabetes. The prevalence of diabetes is growing rapidly. Globally, the number of adults affected with diabetes is estimated to increase from 135 million in 1995 to 300 million by 2025. Patients with diabetes are at increased risk for heart and blood vessel diseases. Heart and vessel diseases are the leading cause of diabetes-related death. Diabetes can directly damage heart and cause the heart not working properly, a condition called diabetic cardiomyopathy. Diabetic cardiomyopathy occurs independently of other heart disorders such as heart vessel disease and high blood pressure. However, how diabetes causes diabetic cardiomyopathy remains not fully understood. 
Excessive oxidant products have been linked to the onset of diabetic cardiomyopathy. Recent studies have found that damage caused by oxidant products plays a critical role in diabetic cardiomyopathy. Oxidant products are generated by different sources, among which an enzyme called NADPH oxidase has been suggested as a main source in heart muscle cells. A protein called Rac1 is an important subunit of this enzyme and is required for this enzyme's activation. However, the role of Rac1 in diabetic cardiomyopathy has not been fully elucidated. Thus, the present study is aimed to understand if Rac1 plays a role in development of diabetic cardiomyopathy and how Rac1 causes this heart disorder. The results from this study will help to design the treatment methods for diabetic cardiomyopathy.",3 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=171747&lang=en
171757,Short and longterm effects of sports concussions in athletes,Lassonde  Maryse,"Lassonde, Maryse; Theoret, Hugo",Universit&eacute; de Montr&eacute;al,Qu&eacute;bec,Canada,200809,527659.0,Operating Grant,Operating Grants,Biomedical,Aging,Imaging; Mild Cognitive Impairment; Mild Traumatic Brain Injury; Motricity; Sports,"Sports concussion is a major problem affecting thousands of people in North America every year. In the United States alone, close to 300,000 sports-related concussions are reported annually, though the actual number of sustained concussions is likely much higher when unreported and undiagnosed incidences are factored in (Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, 1997). There has been an increasing amount of research dedicated to investigating the effects of concussions ""or mild traumatic brain injury (mTBI)- including work conducted in our laboratories. In particular, we have shown electrophysiological anomalies in asymptomatic concussed athletes up to several years post-injury, suggesting reduced attention and information processing capacities.  In parallel, we have also shown long-term changes in motor cortex excitability consecutive to sports concussion and at a functional level, studies have demonstrated an association between sports concussions and balance problems that persisted at least 30 days post-injury. Moreover, we have recently found that, compared to non-concussed former athletes of the same age (60 years old), older athletes with a history of concussion displayed a lower performance on neuropsychological tests of episodic memory as well as electrophysiological and motor anomalies accompanied by bradykinesia, a profile that may suggest the emergence of dementia. These various findings stress the importance of better assessing the short and long-term effects of concussions on the brain. The general objective of the present research program will be to investigate these effects in three different sets of studies: 1) changes cognitive function and its uderlying electrophysiology; 2) changes in motor function and 3) biochemical changes.  This research program should allow us to assess whether sports concussions may be considered a risk factor in the early deterioration of brain functions.",5 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=171757&lang=en
171759,Structure/function studies of adenovirus in the infected cell,Parks  Robin J,"Parks, Robin J",Ottawa Hospital Research Institute,Ontario,Canada,200809,596250.0,Operating Grant,Operating Grants,Biomedical,Infection and Immunity,Adenovirus; Chromatin; Dna; Gene Expression; Histone,"Adenovirus is a common virus that causes mild illness in most patients, primarily respiratory disease, but can be lethal in immunocompromised individuals, or pediatric and geriatric populations.  Currently, there are no effective treatments to combat infection with this virus.  Adenovirus has evolved to very effectively take-over the host cell and redirect all cellular processes to the production of new viruses.  To accomplish this, soon after entering the host cell, the virus must begin to efficiently express genes from the incoming viral DNA that are necessary for co-opting cellular functions.  Little is known about the structure of the viral DNA within the infected cell:  whether it is wrapped in cellular proteins, called histones, that are crucial for expression and regulation of normal cellular genes was unknown.  Our recent studies have shown that in the infected cell the viral DNA is wrapped in histones, and that this event is necessary for efficient expression of viral genes.  We will now expand these studies to determine the cellular proteins that are involved in depositing histones on the Ad DNA, and the impact this event has on virus replication and growth.  Our studies may identify new targets for therapeutic intervention, which will lessen the impact of Ad-induced disease and virus spread.",5 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=171759&lang=en
171765,Putative therapeutic role of endogenous NAAG,Bergeron  Richard,"Bergeron, Richard",Ottawa Hospital Research Institute,Ontario,Canada,200809,440068.0,Operating Grant,Operating Grants,Biomedical,"Neurosciences, Mental Health and Addiction",Glutamate; Hippocampus; Ischemia; Nmda Receptor; Whole-Cell Patch-Clamp,"Our brain works similar to an automobile: to function it requires a continuous supply of energy. Instead of using gasoline our
brain uses glucose and oxygen. Both are carried to the brain through the blood. When the large energy demand of the brain
is not completely satisfied due to a decreased or completely interrupted flow of blood, a pathological condition known as
brain ischemia or stroke occurs. A few minutes after the occurrence of a stroke, a 'serial killer' comes out the cells. This
'serial killer' is named glutamate. Glutamate can cause death or permanent damage if no medical intervention is performed
immediately. There is currently no treatment that can stop the 'serial killer'. According to statistical data, brain ischemia
represents the third highest cause of death in industrialized countries. The high costs of medical care required by surviving
individuals, from whom a large percentage are permanently disabled, is a major cause of economic burden. The ultimate
goal of this research proposal is to better understand how a small molecule, named N-acetyl-aspartyl-glutamate (NAAG), that already exists in huge quantities in the brain may be used to stop the 'serial killer'. It may protect the brain in a situation when the blood supply is not sufficient or is interrupted, even for a few minutes. We (our laboratory and other labs around the world) have identified two receptors in the brain on which this small molecule NAAG works. A receptor is a kind of 'door' that allows communication between the inside and the outside of the cells.  Too much glutamate is thought to be the cause of cell death. There are billions of cells in the brain and they all have a crucial role in maintaining good functioning of the brain. My research aims to prevent this terrible disease by arresting the 'serial killer' before it commits its crime.",4 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=171765&lang=en
171770,Oxidative Stress and Neonatal Pulmonary Vascular Resistance Control,Belik  Jaques,"Belik, Jaques",University of Toronto,Ontario,Canada,200809,597193.0,Operating Grant,Operating Grants,Biomedical,"Human Development, Child and Youth Health",Endothelial Cells; Fetal; Lung; Newborn; Smooth Muscle; Vascular,"The lung is exposed to high oxygen content and requires a protective mechanism to prevent oxygen-induced damage to cells.  Birth is associated with a significant increase in oxygen exposure when compared with fetal life.  Although neonates and newborn animals appear to withstand a lack (hypoxia) or excess of oxygen (hyperoxia) more so than adults, once the lung cells are injured the newborn can develop a serious condition called ""pulmonary hypertension"".  The purpose of my project is to understand the mechanism accounting for the newborn increased resistance to hypoxia and/or hyperoxia and the factors leading to the development of pulmonary hypertension.  The study will be conducted in normal and genetically modified mice and a novel potentially beneficial drug for the treatment of pulmonary hypertension will be tested.",5 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=171770&lang=en
171772,Unmet needs and unfulfilled wishes at the end of life: A population-based mortality follow back study,Burge  Frederick I,"Burge, Frederick I",Dalhousie University (Nova Scotia),Nova Scotia,Canada,200809,432187.0,Operating Grant,Operating Grants,Health systems / services,Health Services and Policy Research,Aging; Chronic Disease; End-Of-Life Care; Population-Based Health Services Research,"Improving care for those at the end of life is important for Canadians. There are many more of us living to be old, approaching death with prolonged experiences of multiple chronic diseases. Although our knowledge about health service use at the end of life is improving, we have much more to learn. Among cancer patients differences in health service use is seen, such as the low use of specialized palliative care by the elderly. However, we do not know if these differences in services used are influenced by variations in patient needs or the choices they make as death approaches. It is also time to expand our knowledge to include those who died of chronic diseases other than cancer. Obtaining this information from dying persons is difficult for them and time consuming. Therefore, we plan to examine the experience of end-of-life care (EOLC) among adults in Nova Scotia, from the family's, or key informant's, perspective. In this study we will examine, from the key informant's perspective, (1) the needs of Nova Scotians during the end of life and what proportion of people had those needs met, (2) whether their wishes or care preferences regarding EOLC were fulfilled, (3) the satisfaction with EOLC received, and (4) the effect of age, sex and location of care on satisfaction with EOLC received, unmet need and unfulfilled care preferences (wishes). We believe this will be the first population based study of key informant's views of the dying experience in Canada. The results will provide vital new information to guide policy and program development based on informant estimates of needs and wishes of patients as they approach death.",4 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=171772&lang=en
171780,Rac1 Signaling in Myocardial TNF-alpha Expression in Sepsis,Feng  Qingping,"Feng, Qingping",Western University (Ontario),Ontario,Canada,200809,706487.0,Operating Grant,Operating Grants,Biomedical,Circulatory and Respiratory Health,Lipopolysaccharide; Nitric Oxide; Sepsis; Signal Transduction; Tumor Necrosis Factor-Alpha,"Sepsis is one of the main consequences of infectious diseases and occurs in 2-11% of all hospital or intensive care unit admissions. Mortality is 20-30% in sepsis and 40-80% in septic shock. Cardiac dysfunction is a common complication of septic shock. Lipopolysaccharide (LPS), the endotoxin of Gram-negative bacteria induces tumor necrosis factor-alpha (TNF-alpha), a pro-inflammatory cytokine. TNF-alpha is one of the main mediators responsible for cardiac dysfunction in sepsis. However, mechanisms leading to TNF-alpha production in the heart in sepsis are not fully understood. The goal of this proposal is to study the role of Rac1, a signaling molecule in the regulation of myocardial TNF-alpha expression and cardiac function during sepsis. The proposal will increase our understanding on mechanisms regulating TNF-alpha expression in sepsis, and may have therapeutic implications in the treatment of sepsis.",5 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=171780&lang=en
171782,The function and regulation of short-stature genes during limb development,Cobb  John A,"Cobb, John A",University of Calgary,Alberta,Canada,200809,704020.0,Operating Grant,Operating Grants,Biomedical,Musculoskeletal Health and Arthritis,Embryonic Patterning; Enhancers; Limb Development; Shox; Shox2; Transcription Factors,"Transcription factor proteins introduce pattern into the embryo by controlling gene expression.  One such patterning process is the formation of the limbs (arms and legs).  Different transcription factors are necessary for the development of specific segments of the limbs, and birth defects can result when the function of a transcription factor is missing.  Because developmental patterning is similar in all mammals, we use limb development in the mouse as a model.  For example, we have found that the mouse transcription factor gene Shox2 is necessary to form the proximal segment of the limbs (the humerus in the arms and the femur in the legs).  Shox2 is closely related to a human gene called SHOX whose disruption causes the malformed limbs in people with Turner, Léri-Weill and Langer syndromes, which together affect approximately 1 in 3,000 people.  We hypothesize that mouse Shox2 and human SHOX have similar cellular functions that are exerted in different parts of the embryo depending on where the genes are expressed.  As a first step to test this hypothesis we need to identify the genes that mouse SHOX2 regulates. We will test potential SHOX2-target genes by changing their expression in transgenic mice.  If we can reproduce the Shox2-mutant phenotype by specifically changing the expression of putative targets this will confirm the importance of regulating these genes during limb patterning. Second, we will investigate how the expression of Shox genes is controlled by DNA sequences called enhancers.  This analysis is important because deletions on the human chromosome near the SHOX gene can cause limb malformations without disturbing the SHOX gene itself, presumably by removing enhancer sequences. Because human DNA elements are generally functional in mouse embryos, we propose to test the activity of putative human DNA enhancers in transgenic mice to determine how their absence might be involved in the human pathology.",5 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=171782&lang=en
171793,La méthode d'auto-assemblage pour l'élaboration de tissus urologiques autologues reconstruits par génie tissulaire.,Bolduc  St&eacute;phane,"Bolduc, Stéphane",Universit&eacute; Laval,Qu&eacute;bec,Canada,200809,388428.0,Operating Grant,Operating Grants,Biomedical,Musculoskeletal Health and Arthritis,Cellules Humaines; Confocale; Culture Cellulaire; Cystographie.; Génie Tissulaire; Histopathologie,"La vessie est un réservoir élastique responsable de l'emmagasinage de l'urine à basses pressions. Dans certaines conditions pathologiques, la fonction du muscle vésical est altérée et mène à des pressions intravésicales élevées qui, non traitées, résultent en des dommages rénaux. Présentement, nous employons les segments intestinaux lors de reconstruction, mais cela amène des complications significatives attribuées aux différences dans les fonctions propres des segments intestinaux et de l'épithélium vésical. Pour sa part, l'urètre, segment tubulaire servant à vidanger la vessie, présente également son lot de pathologies qui demandent reconstruction, voir son remplacement, en raison de sténoses ou perte de tissus. Pour remédier à ces obstacles, nous proposons de développer de nouveaux modèles de tissus urologiques reconstruits en laboratoire à partir de cellules du patient.
Ce projet a pour but de développer un modèle porcin de vessie reconstruite par génie tissulaire, puis de réaliser une transplantation autologue (agrandissement vésical) du tissu chez le porc. Nous avons également mis au point un modèle de tube ou urètre reconstruit in vitro pour son implantation autologue chez le lapin. 
Impact du projet : L'élaboration d'un modèle de vessie et d'urètre reconstruits par génie tissulaire à l'aide de cellules autologues pourrait avoir un impact clinique majeur étant données les complications présentement rencontrées dont l'utilisation de segments intestinaux. De plus, démontrer la faisabilité de reconstruire des tissus urologiques ouvrirait la porte à la reconstruction par génie tissulaire des uretères, et des corps spongieux et caverneux du pénis.",3 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=171793&lang=en
171797,Molecular mechanisms of DNA damage tolerance - A yeast model,Xiao  Wei,"Xiao, Wei",University of Saskatchewan,Saskatchewan,Canada,200809,492133.0,Operating Grant,Operating Grants,Biomedical,Cancer Research,Cancer; Dna Repair And Mutagenesis; Genome Instability; Molecular Biology; Saccharomyces Cerevisiae; Ubiquitination,"It is now well accepted that cancer is caused by DNA alterations and mutations in a group of cancer related genes. DNA repair plays an important role in protecting cells from such DNA damage and mutation and is considered as the genome guardian. Defects in many DNA repair genes have been linked to cancer and other human diseases. We recently contributed to the discovery of a new mechanism collectively called DNA damage tolerance, in which damaged DNA is not repaired, but continued DNA synthesis and cell division is allowed in the presence of damaged DNA. Using yeast as a model, we have made significant progress in our understanding of how this process occurs, which genes are involved, and the consequences if one of these functions is missing. More specifically, we recently discovered a centralized system to coordinate three relatively independent damage tolerance pathways. In the current proposal, we wish to continue this investigation and pay special attention to how each pathway operates and how they are jointly coordinated. Since each pathway will lead to different consequences of genomic instability, understanding the above regulatory mechanisms will help to assess the risk of cancer. Since almost all the genes we are studying in this proposal have human counterparts, we are certain that the knowledge obtained from this study will be applied to develop diagnostic and therapeutic tools for cancer.",4 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=171797&lang=en
171800,TGFbeta receptor trafficking and signaling in lung cancer cells,Di Guglielmo  Gianni (John) M,"Di Guglielmo, Gianni (John) M",Western University (Ontario),Ontario,Canada,200809,633015.0,Operating Grant,Operating Grants,Biomedical,Cancer Research,Cell Motility; Migration And Invasion; Non-Small Cell Lung Cancer (Nsclc); Receptor Trafficking; Signal Transduction; Subcellular Fractionation,"Transforming growth factor-beta (TGFß) is a cytokine that normally acts as a tumor suppressor.  However, in lung tumors it switches roles and aides tumor cells to become metastatic.  We will investigate the regulation of this switch and how TGFß signals are regulated in lung cell tumors. TGFß associates with cell surface receptors, which internalize rapidly into the cell body.  The interaction of these activated receptors with different molecules in their cellular travels will affect signaling outcome.  In this study we propose to analyze a novel aspect of TGFß regulation; the relationship between TGFß receptor traffic and signal transduction. We propose to analyze how proteins that associate with the receptors alter TGFß receptor trafficking and signaling.  These proteins will then be tested for their TGFß-dependent metastatic potential of lung cancer cells.  This will be tested by analyzing lung cancer cell growth, migration and invasion in cell culture models.  This research will identify molecules that will be eventually used as therapeutic targets in lung cancer patients.",5 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=171800&lang=en
171813,Mechanisms of microbial RNA trans-splicing and editing - an integrated genomics and bioinformatics approach,Burger  Gertraud,"Burger, Gertraud",Universit&eacute; de Montr&eacute;al,Qu&eacute;bec,Canada,200809,989235.0,Operating Grant,Operating Grants,Biomedical,Genetics,Biology And Evolution Of Microbial Pathogens; Evolution Of Trans-Spliceosome And Editosome; Genome And Transcriptome Sequencing; In Silico Prediction Of Trans-Splicing And Editing Signals; Molecular Mechanism Of Trans-Splicing And Rna Editing; Protein Complexes Catalysing Trans-Splicing And Rna Editing,"According to the central dogma of biology, genes encoded by DNA are transcribed into RNAs, which are then translated into proteins. Today, we know that RNA transcripts undergo numerous maturations steps to yield translatable RNAs. Typically, post-transcriptional RNA processing includes removal of introns and addition of a tail consisting of the base A. In addition, the sequence of some transcripts is changed ('RNA editing') or pasted together from distinct RNAs ('trans-splicing'). Several such instances have been observed in human, and they have been linked to the generation of enzyme isoforms in specialized tissue cells. Yet, the underlying molecular mechanisms of RNA editing and trans-splicing are not fully understood.
We propose here to investigate RNA editing and trans-splicing in eukaryotic microbes - diplonemids - where these otherwise rare events are the rule. This work has potential long-term impacts on health research. First, dissection of the cellular machineries catalyzing these processes may expand the molecular tools for treating hereditary disorders at the RNA level. Second, these studies may also shed light on the evolution of the pathogenic microbes Leishmania and Trypanosoma, the causative agents of leishmaniasis and Chagas disease, since diplonemids are their free-living sistergroup.",5 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=171813&lang=en
171818,Approaches to understand the regulation of microtubules and microtubule motor proteins in mitotic spindle assembly and the positioning of intracellular structures.,Srayko  Martin A,"Srayko, Martin A",University of Alberta,Alberta,Canada,200809,300000.0,CIHR New Investigator,Salary Programs,Biomedical,Genetics,Cytoskeleton; Microscopy; Microtubules; Molecular Genetics; Motor Proteins; Spindle Assembly,"A single cell division can herald the beginning of life or portend the development of a devastating disease such as cancer. With each division, all animal cells must partition genetic material correctly into the future daughter cells. To do this, the cell first replicates its genetic material and then builds a complex 3D structure to physically separate the duplicated genetic material. This structure is called the mitotic spindle and it is largely composed of long rigid tube-like polymers termed microtubules. In addition to forming the mitotic spindle, microtubules give cells their shape, they help cells move, and they provide a scaffold for the transport of proteins to and from the outer reaches of the cell. How does a simple polymer provide all of these functions within a cell? The simple answer is that the cell contains many proteins that serve as cellular architects, regulating when and where microtubules form. In ways that we do not understand, the microtubule regulators work together to coordinate the assembly and disassembly of microtubules at specific intracellular locations in a timely manner.  In order to better understand the regulation of microtubules in the cell, we are using molecular genetics to identify proteins required for microtubule-based processes such as mitotic spindle assembly. With specialized microscopy assays, we can further characterize the role of the regulatory proteins by determining if they instruct microtubules to grow, shrink, or move. For example, one molecular pathway we are studying is implicated in controlling the stability of microtubules in the mitotic spindle, and another project focuses on understanding how the mitotic spindle is positioned by nano-scale motors that pull on microtubules. Knowledge gained from these studies will help us understand how cells control microtubules during cell division. It could also provide new approaches to interfere with microtubule function as a way to halt renegade cell division in cancer.",5 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=171818&lang=en
171827,Auditory perception in infancy:  Event-related potential measures of development and effects of experience,Trainor  Laurel J,"Trainor, Laurel J",McMaster University,Ontario,Canada,200809,723872.0,Operating Grant,Operating Grants,Biomedical,"Human Development, Child and Youth Health",Auditory; Development; Event-Related Potentials; Hearing; Infancy; Mismatch Negativity,"The perception and acquisition of language and music depend critically on developing efficient brain networks for complex sound processing.  The research in this proposal examines the brain's response to sound in infants and children.  The auditory system has evolved to respond to change, whether the onset of a new sound that could signal, for example, a dangerous predator, or a change in a sound, for example signaling emotion in a voice. During the previous grant period we discovered that the cortical response to a change in a sound feature (e.g., pitch, timing or location) undergoes a radical development during early infancy.  Here we apply this knowledge to study the development of (1) pitch processing, including pitch patterns as found in speech intonation and melodies, (2) ""auditory scene analysis"", whereby infants learn to process the sounds from more than one object at the same time, (3) the effects of learning and specific experience with sounds on brain development, and (4) the development of oscillatory brain activity that reflects attention and memory processes.  The proposed studies examine aspects of complex auditory processing that are critical for the acquisition of language and music.  Only by understanding these mechanisms will we be able to understand why language and music do not develop optimally in certain special populations.",5 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=171827&lang=en
171841,The CAP study:  Cardiovascular Disease After Preeclampsia,McDonald  Sarah D,"McDonald, Sarah D",McMaster University,Ontario,Canada,200809,300000.0,CIHR New Investigator,Salary Programs,Clinical,"Human Development, Child and Youth Health",Cardiovascular Disease; Carotid Intima-Media Thickness; Cerebrovascular Disease; Coronary Artery Disease; Preeclampsia; Ultrasound,"A group of researchers from McMaster University is studying women who had preeclampsia (high blood pressure during the last half of pregnancy along with leakage of protein in their urine) because they seem to be at double the risk for early heart disease and stroke.However, the studies which have been published did not determine if preeclampsia itself is a cardiovascular risk factor because they did not account for all of the other known risk factors.  In particular, they did not study leakage of protein in the urine (microalbuminuria) which is a risk factor. We seek to address these issues in the current study.  Women will be studied 10-20 years after the pregnancy in which they had preeclampsia and compared to women with uncomplicated pregnancies.  We will send an invitation to participate to both groups.  A research nurse will schedule an appointment with those who agree.  At the appointment, the research nurse will ask questions about their health, exercise, smoking, stress, diet and other risk factors for heart disease.  She will measure their blood pressure, height, weight, waist circumference and hip circumference.  Participants will have urine and blood tested for risk factors for heart disease.  They will have an ultrasound of the blood vessels in their neck to measure the thickness of the blood vessel wall.  The amount of early atherosclerosis (thickening of the blood vessel wall) will be compared in women with a history of preeclampsia to women with uncomplicated pregnancies.  This study would add to existing knowledge by i) determining for the first time the prevalence of early (called subclinical) atherosclerosis in relatively young women in their 40's and 50's who have had preeclampsia, ii) explaining the cause of any increase in subclinical atherosclerosis with a complete assessment of current cardiovascular risk factors which will allow us to determine if preeclampsia itself is a risk  for heart disease.",5 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=171841&lang=en
171842,Vitamin D in Pregnancy and Lactation,Green  Tim,"Green, Tim",University of British Columbia,British Columbia,Canada,200809,302364.0,Operating Grant,Operating Grants,Clinical,"Nutrition, Metabolism and Diabetes",25 Hydroxy Vitamin D; Lactation; Pregnancy; Requirement; Supplements; Vitamin D,"Pregnant and breastfeeding women need to have adequate vitamin D levels because low vitamin D in the mother's blood can be bad for the health of the mother and baby. Scientists have observed that Canadian women of childbearing age (for example, ages 15 to 45 years) have low levels of vitamin D. This suggests that women are not getting enough of this vitamin. Humans get a small amount of vitamin D from the food we eat, but most of it is made in our skin when it absorbs sunlight. In winter in Canada, there is not enough sunlight to make this happen. So it is important for pregnant and breastfeeding women to take extra vitamin D in a pill (a vitamin supplement). So far, however, we do not know how much pregnant and breastfeeding women need to take to ensure good health for themselves and their babies. Two Canadian recommendations differ by 10 times (5 versus 50 units). Also, when human skin is darker (naturally or because of a tan) it has lower light absorption and so makes less vitamin D. We do not yet know if a woman's skin colour affects the amount of vitamin D she needs to take. 
In this study, we want to find out how much extra vitamin D pregnant and breast¬feeding women need to take in order to need to achieve an appropriate level in themselves and their babies. To try to answer these questions, we propose to study 210 pregnant women who will take a vitamin D supplement (5, 25, and 50 units per day) from pregnancy through breastfeeding. We will measure the effect of vitamin D supplements on the growth of the baby and on the bone health of mother and baby. We will also determine if there is any effect of skin colour, which we will study using a device called a colorimeter that measures how might light is reflected by the skin. 
The results of this study will important for women and their doctors and for the organizations and government (Health Canada) who make the recommendations about vitamin supplements in pregnant and breastfeeding women.",3 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=171842&lang=en
171847,"Analysis of the Interplay Between Histone MTases, DNA Methylation and Proviral Silencing",Lorincz  Matthew C,"Lorincz, Matthew C",University of British Columbia,British Columbia,Canada,200809,300000.0,CIHR New Investigator,Salary Programs,Biomedical,Genetics,Chromatin Immunoprecipitation; Dna Methylation; Epigenetics; Gene Regulation; Histone Modifications; Retroviruses,"Normally, cells in the body grow, divide, and die in an orderly manner. Although there are many kinds of cancer, all develop
when cells begin to divide abnormally. DNA is the material in every cell that directs all of its functions, the genetic blueprint of
life. Tumor-suppressor genes are a subset of genes that encode the proteins that regulate cell growth. Mutation of the genes
encoding these proteins leads to the development of cancer. In many cancer cells, these proteins are no longer produced,
not because the genes that encode them have become mutated, but rather because the genes that encode them have been
shut-off. This process frequently involves a specific chemical change in the DNA of these genes called methylation.
Paradoxically, coincident with the methylation of tumor-suppressor genes, most of the genome in tumor cells, including
vestigial ""endogenous"" viruses, becomes demethylated. The underlying cause of these alterations in DNA methylation
patterns remains a mystery. The aim of this proposal is to characterize the underlying mechanism(s)/biochemical pathway(s)
leading to DNA methylation of the genome in normal cells, using the mouse as a model system. Knowledge gained from this
work may lead to the development of pharmaceuticals that counteract or inhibit aberrant DNA methylation observed not only
in cancer, but in other diseases as well, such as Fragile X, ICF and ATRX syndromes.",5 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=171847&lang=en
171855,Generation of hematopoietic stem cells from embryonic stem cells,Keller  Gordon M,"Keller, Gordon M",University Health Network (Toronto),Ontario,Canada,200809,862684.0,Operating Grant,Operating Grants,Biomedical,Circulatory and Respiratory Health,Differentiation; Embryonic Stem Cells; Hematopoietic Stem Cells; Induced Pluripotent Stem Cells; Screening; Signaling Pathways,"The focus of this research proposal is to understand how to direct embryonic stem cells (ESCs) and reprogrammed pluripotential stem cells (iPSCs) to generate blood forming stem cells in a tissue culture dish. The experiments in this proposal are based on recent findings from our laboratory that have identified a cell type that can make most of the different types of blood cells, suggesting that it could represent the earliest blood forming stem cell.  The studies proposed in the first part of this application will further characterize these cells to determine if they are blood forming stem cells.  The studies outlined in the second part of the application are aimed at identifying strategies that will enable us to generate large numbers of blood-forming stem cells from these different pluripotent stem cell populations. While the application is focused on mouse ESCs, we anticipate that the findings will be easily translated to human cells. The outcome of these studies have a number of important implications for improving public health.  First, understanding how blood-forming stem cells are generated from ESCs and iPSCs will provide a novel and unlimited source of these cells for transplantation.  Transplantation of blood-forming stem cells is a routine proven treatment for certain types of leukemia and blood cell disorders.  Being able to generate unlimited numbers of these cells will significantly expand the patient pool that can be treated by transplantation.  Second, the ability to recreate blood formation in a petri dish from ESC and iPSCs provides an unprecedented opportunity to study and identify the causes of blood cell disease such as leukemia and certain types of anemias.  Understanding the events that initiate these diseases will provide new approaches for developing therapies that specifically target the cells that cause the disease.",5 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=171855&lang=en
171857,Quantitative Magnetic Resonance Imaging of Neurodevelopment,Beaulieu  Christian,"Beaulieu, Christian",University of Alberta,Alberta,Canada,200809,733595.0,Operating Grant,Operating Grants,Biomedical,"Neurosciences, Mental Health and Addiction",Brain; Cognitive Ability; Development; Fetal Alcohol Spectrum Disorder; Magnetic Resonance Imaging; Mri,"The primary goal is to develop and use state-of-the-art Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI) to study the development of the brain in both healthy and disabled children. As a child matures into adolescence and young adulthood, major structural changes occur in various parts of the brain. Much remains unknown on how the brain evolves with age in healthy development and how it relates to cognitive ability such as math and reading in individuals. In other words, why are some people better at certain tasks than others? Sophisticated MRI acquisition techniques and image analysis can safely and non-invasively evaluate when, where, and how much specific brain regions change in a person. A comparison of the integrity of the brain white matter (i.e. the ""wiring""), the thickness of the cortical gray matter (i.e. the ""computers""), and the volume of deep gray matter (i.e. the ""relay stations"") to cognitive assessments will be performed in a large number of healthy individuals. Understanding how the healthy brain develops is important to understand the consequences when something goes wrong.

While many children develop normally, there are others who suffer from cognitive, neurological, and behavioural problems. Some children have permanent structural brain damage because of the consumption of alcohol by the mother during pregnancy, leading to a broad condition known as fetal alcohol spectrum disorder (FASD). Children with FASD often have motor delays, and deficits in attention, learning and memory, executive functioning, mathematics, and language. Quantitative MRI may identify regions of brain abnormality that are not detected with conventional clinical MRI. Differences in the severity and location of brain changes may explain the range of cognitive deficits seen amongst FASD children. Knowledge of the responsible brain regions could lead to improved therapies and individual-based treatment strategies since all patients may not show the same structural abnormalities.",5 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=171857&lang=en
171861,Deciphering signalling complexity at the single cell level using high-throughput microfluidic imaging.,Hansen  Carl L,"Hansen, Carl L",University of British Columbia,British Columbia,Canada,200809,609805.0,Operating Grant,Operating Grants,Biomedical,Genetics,Genomics; High-Throughput; Live Cell Imaging; Microfluidics; Protein Signalling Networks; Single Cell Analysis,"Cells respond to external stimuli through the complex interaction of molecules which is referred to as signalling.  The proper regulation of these responses is crucial for proper development while misregulation is associated with onset of diseases including cancer.  A major obstacle in understanding and ultimately manipulating cellular responses is the inherent variability of individual cells that is difficult to capture using conventional techniques.  This proposal will exploit newly developed methodologies based on micro-scale channels and valves to enable, for the first time, the detailed analysis of signaling at the single cell level.  These studies will shed light on fundamental processes relevant to all aspects of human health.",5 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=171861&lang=en
171868,Deciphering signalling complexity at the single cell level using high-throughput microfluidic imaging.,Hansen  Carl L,"Hansen, Carl L",University of British Columbia,British Columbia,Canada,200809,300000.0,CIHR New Investigator,Salary Programs,Biomedical,Genetics,Genomics; High-Throughput; Live Cell Imaging; Microfluidics; Protein Signalling Networks; Single Cell Analysis,"Cells respond to external stimuli through the complex interaction of molecules which is referred to as signalling.  The proper regulation of these responses is crucial for proper development while misregulation is associated with onset of diseases including cancer.  A major obstacle in understanding and ultimately manipulating cellular responses is the inherent variability of individual cells that is difficult to capture using conventional techniques.  This proposal will exploit newly developed methodologies based on micro-scale channels and valves to enable, for the first time, the detailed analysis of signaling at the single cell level.  These studies will shed light on fundamental processes relevant to all aspects of human health.",5 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=171868&lang=en
171879,Hypoxia-selective radiation sensitizers,Minchinton  Andrew I,"Minchinton, Andrew I",University of British Columbia,British Columbia,Canada,200809,560232.0,Operating Grant,Operating Grants,Biomedical,Cancer Research,Anticancer Drug; Cancer; Dna Repair; Hypoxia; Radiotherapy,"Hypoxic cells occur in human tumours and represent a population of cells resistant to ionizing radiation. Clinical studies in several tumour sites indicate that the effectiveness of radiotherapy is inversely related to the hypoxia measured in human tumours. Hypoxic cells therefore represents a valid target and their eradication would improve the response and cure rate of radiotherapy and therefore could have huge significance for the management of cancer.

The proposed research adopts a previously untried strategy whereby the repair of radiation-induced DNA damage is inhibited selectively in hypoxic cells thereby reducing their resistance to radiotherapy.

This strategy will be accomplished by linking inhibitors of DNA repair with hypoxia activating moieties based on established 'trigger' chemistry. The drug will be inactive in oxygenated cells, but in hypoxic cells the drug will release an active inhibitor of DNA repair. Since only cells with DNA damage are affected only hypoxic cells within the radiation field will be sensitized. Cells in other parts of the body will be unaffected so the drug should have a favourable safety profile.",4 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=171879&lang=en
171887,Extracellular nucleotides in inflammatory cell reactions to pathogenic determinants,Sevigny  Jean,"Sevigny, Jean",Universit&eacute; Laval,Qu&eacute;bec,Canada,200809,693605.0,Operating Grant,Operating Grants,Biomedical,Musculoskeletal Health and Arthritis,Animal Model; Apyrase; Arthritis; Biochemistry; Cd39; Cell Biology,"Leukocytes and endothelial cells play key roles in inflammation and arthritis by releasing chemokines such as IL-8. IL-8 promotes the migration of neutrophils that rapidly accumulate in the inflamed and eliminate the danger. We have made the novel observation that in human monocytes, IL-8 secretion is regulated by extracellular nucleotides; blocking either the action of extracellular nucleotides or the nucleotide receptor P2Y6 prevented IL-8 expression and secretion as well as leukocyte migration to the inflammatory site. Extracellular nucleotides (ATP, ADP, UTP, UDP) are signalling molecules secreted in large amounts by injured and activated cells, especially at sites of inflammation. The signalling and functions induced by extracellular nucleotides in leukocytes and endothelial cells is a new but fast developing research area. Indeed nucleotides are suspected to regulate a variety of proinflammatory responses of these cells via a number of specific P2 receptors such as P2Y6. The concentration of extracellular nucleotides and thus the activation of P2 receptors are tightly regulated by cell surface enzymes called ectonucleotidases. We have discovered the first member of a new family of such enzymes that break down these molecules at the surface of macrophages and neutrophils. We engineered mice deficient in this enzyme, named NTPDase1 that represent a powerful tool to explore the function of nucleotides in inflammation. Our preliminary data suggests the involvement of two P2 receptors in cell migration, and we have obtained mice that do not express these receptors from a collaborator. In this project, using the mutant mice mentioned above together with various cellular and in vivo models, we will elucidate the function of nucleotide signalling in inflammation. We anticipate that our studies will lead to the identification of novel therapeutic targets that will help understand and treat inflammatory diseases such as arthritis as well as infection.",5 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=171887&lang=en
171890,Specificity profiling and prediction of protein networks for peptide recognition domains,Sidhu  Sachdev S,"Sidhu, Sachdev S",University of Toronto,Ontario,Canada,200809,1060677.0,Operating Grant,Operating Grants,Biomedical,Genetics,Biological Pathways; Functional Genomics; Peptide Libraries; Phage Display; Protein Interactions; Proteomics,"Protein-protein interactions are involved in almost all cellular processes, and in particular, eukaryotic signaling pathways are controlled by complex protein networks.  These networks are essential for normal development and cell function, and furthermore, many diseases are caused by imbalances in particular signaling networks.  Thus, a major goal of modern biology  is to define the interacting partners in cellular networks and to elucidate the molecular basis for key protein-protein interactions.  Many of these interactions are mediated by modular peptide recognition domains, which are usually imbedded in large scaffolding proteins and function by recognizing distinct linear motifs within binding partners.  Our laboratory has pioneered the use of combinatorial peptide libraries for identifying high affinity ligands for peptide recognition domains.  We propose a large-scale project that will define the binding specificities of all human SH3 and WW domains, polyproline recognition modules that are involved in many important signaling pathways.  This analysis will contribute to the understanding of cell signaling in normal and diseased cells, and the peptide ligands will be useful as inhibitors that can be used to study protein function inside cells.  Immediate benefits of the research include new advances in Canadian biomedical science, more efficient use of Canadian research resources, and an increased pool of highly qualified personnel in the nationally underrepresented field of combinatorial biology.  Longer term benefits for Canada from obtaining a better understanding of cell signaling networks include potential therapies for many diseases, including cancer and infectious diseases.",5 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=171890&lang=en
171895,Corticolimbic Endocannabinoid Signaling Regulates Adaptation and Neurobehavioral Plasticity to Stress,Gorzalka  Boris B,"Gorzalka, Boris B",University of British Columbia,British Columbia,Canada,200809,565630.0,Operating Grant,Operating Grants,Biomedical,"Neurosciences, Mental Health and Addiction",Depression; Emotional Behavior; Endocannabinoid; Neuroendocrinology; Neuropharmacology; Stress,"Cannabis contains chemicals named cannabinoids which exert their effects on behavior by acting upon cannabinoid receptors in the brain. It is known that the brain also produces its own cannabinoids, known as endocannabinoids. One important function of endocannabinoids is to regulate emotional behavior and stress responsivity through interactions with cannabinoid receptors in the brain. Our laboratory has recently shown that endocannabinoids may be involved in the development of major depression as endocannabinoid levels are reduced in individuals with major depression and increased following antidepressant treatment. One mechanism by which endocannabinoids may influence the development of depressive illness is by modulating the physiological and behavioral responses to stress. The aim of this research is to examine the role endocannabinoids play in the ability of the brain to adapt to stress and if endocannabinoids are involved in the changes in emotional behavior that are induced by exposure to stressful stimuli. Ultimately, this research will help us to understand the role of endocannabinoids in resilience to stress and how deficits in this system may increase human vulnerability to stress-related mental illness.",5 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=171895&lang=en
171911,Optimization of immunotherapy of bladder cancer: response to various non-specific immunomodulators,Fradet  Yves,"Fradet, Yves",Universit&eacute; Laval,Qu&eacute;bec,Canada,200809,322690.0,Operating Grant,Operating Grants,Biomedical,Cancer Research,Bcg; Immune Cells; Innate Immune Response; Non-Specific Immunotherapy; Nramp1/Slc11a1; Toll-Like Receptors,"Bladder cancer is sixth in incidence in Canada. About 75% of initial tumors are non-muscle invasive and although treated effectively by transurethral surgery, will recur in 50-80% of cases and progress to invasive cancer in 10-20% of patients. The preferred treatment to prevent recurrence and progression of high-risk tumors is non-specific immunotherapy with bacillus Calmette-Guérin (BCG). The efficacy of BCG immunotherapy thus offers a unique model and opportunity to investigate the immune response in cancer. Data in the literature have identified a gene that is involved in resistance to BCG therapy for bladder cancer in mice. In humans, that same gene has been linked to susceptibility to various infectious and autoimmune diseases. It is known to be involved in immunity.
We obtained evidence that alteration of this gene can affect the response to BCG. We also observed its expression in normal bladder and in some bladder tumors. Moreover we observed a statistically significant correlation between the presence of different cells of the immune system infiltrating bladder tumors and the response of patients to BCG treatment. These cells of the immune system are known to express that same gene, which thus appears to be a central actor in the immune response to tumors.
In this project, we plan to further pursue the characterization of the identified gene in bladder cancer to better understand its role in resistance to immunotherapy. This will be realized by using normal and tumoral bladder cells, that will be grown in the lab and submitted to BCG or similar therapies. The effect of BCG and alternate immunotherapies will be analyzed by measuring the modulation of a series of genes related to the immune response. We will also pursue the analysis of infiltration of cells of the immune system in bladder tumors and of characteristics of bladder tumor cells in correlation with the response of tumors to immunotherapy.",3 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=171911&lang=en
171914,Evidence-based algorithm selection in public health surveillance,Buckeridge  David L,"Buckeridge, David L",McGill University,Qu&eacute;bec,Canada,200809,419795.0,Operating Grant,Operating Grants,Social / Cultural / Environmental / Population Health,Population and Public Health,Artificial Intelligence; Evaluation; Knowledge Modeling; Outbreak Detection; Public Health Surveillance,"In recent years, many public health agencies have started to operate automated surveillance systems. Due to the large volume of data, surveillance analysts are not able to review all data manually. Instead, they use statistical algorithms that screen the data automatically and issue alerts to draw an epidemiologist's attention to potential disease outbreaks.
It is well recognized that not all of these algorithms perform equally well when it comes to detecting outbreaks quickly and accurately. Moreover, the same algorithm may perform better or worse under different conditions. To ensure the effectiveness of automated surveillance systems, it is important to understand the factors that determine the performance of detection algorithms and to select the best algorithm for a given context. 
The goal of this project is to evaluate the performance of different outbreak detection algorithms, by experimenting with different algorithms and different types of surveillance data and then analyzing the results of these experiments. This knowledge will serve as an information resource for public health practitioners as they select algorithms for different surveillance systems or develop new algorithms.",3 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=171914&lang=en
171924,Brain degeneration and regeneration in preclinical models of Alzheimer's disease,Aubert  Isabelle,"Aubert, Isabelle","Sunnybrook Research Institute (Toronto, Ontario)",Ontario,Canada,200809,855595.0,Operating Grant,Operating Grants,Biomedical,"Neurosciences, Mental Health and Addiction",Alzheimer'S Disease; Axonal Regeneration; Cholinergic Neurons; Nerve Growth Factor; Removal Of Amyloid Beta,"Alzheimer's disease is associated with the damage of a particular type of brain cell, the neuron. A specialized part of the neuron, termed the axon, is primarily and most severely affected by the toxicity of amyloid beta, present in the Alzheimer brain. 

It is well established that the degeneration of cholinergic neurons is significant in Alzheimer's disease and that it is related to learning and memory deficits. Enhancing cholinergic neurotransmission has been a main therapeutic focus with the use of acetylcholinesterase inhibitors, to prolong the action of the neurotransmitter acetylcholine. However, through the course of the disease, cholinergic axonal degeneration progresses and cholinergic cell bodies, deprived of nutrients such as nerve growth factor (NGF), ultimately die. Once such severe cholinergic degeneration occurs, treatments with acetylcholinesterase inhibitors have limited hope of success. The levels of acetylcholine, which could be protected by acetylcholinesterase inhibitors, are insufficient.

Our goal is to develop a multi-component therapeutic strategy that will restore cognitive function by halting the toxicity of amyloid-beta using novel and effective methods including immunotherapy combined with non-invasive MRI-guided focused ultrasound delivery, scyllo-inositol, and rescuing cholinergic neurons by delivering NGF to specific areas of the brain. We hypothesize that limiting the toxicity of amyloid-beta will enhance the regenerative potential of cholinergic neurons in presence of NGF. In mouse models of Alzheimer's disease, this combined treatment is expected to restore axonal networks leading to the recovery of behavioral functions.

The proposed research provides an improved basis for current and novel therapeutic interventions by reducing amyloid deposition and promoting neuronal regeneration to ameliorate cognitive function, and eventually to improve the quality of life for Alzheimer's patients.",5 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=171924&lang=en
171939,Characterization of the leukemia-inducing NUP98-HOXA9 oncogene using Drosophila and mouse models,Therrien  Marc,"Therrien, Marc",Universit&eacute; de Montr&eacute;al,Qu&eacute;bec,Canada,200809,721795.0,Operating Grant,Operating Grants,Biomedical,Cancer Research,Drosophila Genetics; Genetic Screens; Leukemia; Mouse Hematopoiesis; Transcription Factors,"Oncogenes have the capacity to transform cells and promote cancer. They often result from specific mutations that hyper-activate or change normal gene function and thereby force a cell to engage in a path that it normally does not follow. While a large number of oncogenes have been identified to date, we still know little about the molecular disorders they create. This is in part due to the complexity of the effects as well as the slow pace associated with mammalian-based experimental models. Several other organisms have proven invaluable to elucidate basic cellular processes. For instance, the fruit fly Drosophila has already provided seminal information regarding a large range of  human afflictions, such as neurodegeneration, obesity and aging to name a few. Here, we propose to use Drosophila as a tool to speed-up the characterization of human oncogenes and to verify our findings in mouse models. Because Drosophila genetics is extremely well developed, countless tools are available to rapidly identify novel genes.
  We recently generated a fly model that recapitulates the ability of a human oncogene (NUP98-HOXA9) to induce proliferation and tumor-like formation. Expression of NUP98-HOXA9 during Drosophila eye development produces defects that depend on fly genes related to known mammalian collaborators of NUP98-HOXA9. Moreover, co-expression of NUP98-HOXA9 and one of these collaborators, induces strong cell proliferation behavior that produces large tumor-like formation. We now propose to use this model to identify new partners of NUP98-HOXA9 activity by genetic screening and then test the new partners in mouse leukemia models to ascertain their implication.
  HOX gene dysregulation is often linked to acute myeloid leukemia (AML). This project should unveil a repertoire of genes modulating the action of NUP98-HOXA9. Once validated in mouse models, each of these new genes may represent as many potential targets against HOX-dependent leukemia.",5 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=171939&lang=en
171951,Genetic basis for heterogeneity in response of plasma lipids to plant sterols,Jones  Peter J,"Jones, Peter J",University of Manitoba,Manitoba,Canada,200809,345986.0,Operating Grant,Operating Grants,Clinical,"Nutrition, Metabolism and Diabetes",Atp Binding Cassette; Cholesterol Metabolism; Niemann-Pick C1 Like 1; Plant Sterols; Single Nucleotide Polymorphism; Stable Isotopes,"Lowering serum cholesterol levels plays an important role in prevention of cardiovascular disease. Dietary functional food ingredients plant sterols and plant stanols, have been shown almost unequivocally to safely lower serum cholesterol levels in different studies and meta-analyses over the past two decades. However, in recent years it has been established that considerable differences exist among individuals in their responsiveness of circulating low density lipoprotein-cholesterol (LDL-C) to dietary plant sterols, even under strictly controlled feeding conditions. The overarching goal of the present research program is to identify a genetic basis for variations in responsiveness to plant sterol use, and to identify which components of control of cholesterol metabolism associate with the genetic factors identified. The long term goal is to set up screening tests to distinguish between individuals who will and will not respond to plant sterols as functional food ingredients. It is anticipated that results of the present investigations will result in an improvement in our understanding of the heterogeneity of response of lipid levels to plant sterol consumption. The present research is anticipated to result in identification of genetic traits which will predict which individuals do, and do not, respond to plant sterols, which has important relevance to the health and wellness of Canadians.",3 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=171951&lang=en
171953,Development of biological response modifiers of neurotrophins and their receptors,Saragovi  Horacio U,"Saragovi, Horacio U",Lady Davis Institute for Medical Research (Mtl),Qu&eacute;bec,Canada,200809,667993.0,Operating Grant,Operating Grants,Biomedical,"Neurosciences, Mental Health and Addiction",Cancer; Molecular Biology; Neurodegeneration; Peptidomimetic; Receptor Pharmacology; Structural Biology,"Neurotrophins are a family of neuronal growth factors which bind to and activate specific receptors, which in turn stimulate the growth, survival and differentiation of neurons and other tissues. We propose to continue our studies of how neurotrophins bind to and activate their receptors. Once we understand these mechanisms, we can develop drug-like agents to regulate the activity of the receptors. These agents, in turn, will also serve to further study the receptors. Dysregulation of these mechanisms are far reaching and are implicated in diseases such as Alzheimer's disease,schizophrenia and anxietylike
disorders, Amyotropic Lateral Sclerosis (ALS), and age related memory loss. Drug-like agents developed from this work can potentially serve to treat these disorders.",4 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=171953&lang=en
171963,Biophysics of Functional MRI,Stefanovic  Bojana,"Stefanovic, Bojana","Sunnybrook Research Institute (Toronto, Ontario)",Ontario,Canada,200809,276264.0,Operating Grant,Operating Grants,Biomedical,"Neurosciences, Mental Health and Addiction",Biophysical Modelling; Brain Microcirculation; Brain Physiology; Functional Magnetic Resonance Imaging; Neurovascular Coupling; Two-Photon Microscopy,"Functional magnetic resonance imaging has greatly enhanced our understanding of how the healthy human brain processes information. To date, however, this technology's promise of revolutionizing clinical practice has not been realized, to a large extent due to the lack of a detailed knowledge of the biophysical mechanism that links brain activity to signal changes detected by magnetic resonance imaging (MRI). Although it is well established that brain activity is associated with local changes in brain's blood flow that MRI can detect, an understanding of these blood flow changes and their relationship with brain activity has not been fully developed.  Moreover, the alterations in this relationship that occur with disease are largely unknown. To address these issues, we will perform detailed microscopic and functional MRI investigations in animals, allowing the development of a biophysical model of functional MRI to aid in the interpretation of functional MRI data in patients and providing a platform for future studies of the growing list of diseases that are thought to alter the relationship between blood circulation and activity in the brain, such as stroke and Alzheimer's disease.",3 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=171963&lang=en
171971,Guys Un-limited: Young Men Speak Out About Health Services,Saewyc  Elizabeth M,"Saewyc, Elizabeth M",University of British Columbia,British Columbia,Canada,200809,171056.0,Operating Grant,Operating Grants,Health systems / services,Gender and Health,Access To Services; Adolescents; Foregone Health Care; Mixed Methods; Sexual Abuse/Exploitation; Young Men'S Health,"Sexually exploited and at-risk teen males often experience serious health issues. Recent research in British Columbia has shown as many as 1 in 3 street youth have been sexually exploited, males at equal rates as females. However, services to help sexually-exploited youth are often focused on girls and young women, and use female-centred approaches that may not be supportive for young men. While young men in general access help less often than young women, sexually exploited teens experience stigma that may make them even more reluctant to access services they need. This study will explore sexually-exploited and at-risk young men's experiences of health and social services, how their views and ideals about masculinity influence their decisions to access services, and ways health care can be delivered using male-friendly approaches for this marginalized population.",2 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=171971&lang=en
171972,"Impulsivité, violence et troubles mentaux graves.",Joyal  Christian,"Joyal, Christian",Institut Philippe Pinel de Montr&eacute;al,Qu&eacute;bec,Canada,200809,179613.0,Operating Grant,Operating Grants,Clinical,"Neurosciences, Mental Health and Addiction",Impulsivité; Neuropsychologie; Prevention; Schizophrénie; Troubles Mentaux Sévères; Violence,Certaines personnes atteintes de troubles mentaux graves présentent des risques accrus de violence. Il demeure cependant difficile d'identifier ces personnes et de prévenir ou traiter ce type de violence. Le présent projet vise à vérifier l'hypothèse selon laquelle l'impulsivité comportementale joue un rôle prépondérant dans la commission d'actes agressifs en milieu psychiatrique. Il s'agira notamment de déterminer la valeur de prédiction d'une courte évaluation neuropsychologique d'impulsivité pour le type et le nombre de comportements violents commis à l'interne par des gens atteints d'un trouble mental grave. Cet examen pourrait éventuellement être utilisé dans tout milieu psychiatrique à des fins d'intervention et de prévention.,3 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=171972&lang=en
171975,Antiviral responses to influenza in the natural host.,Magor  Katherine,"Magor, Katherine",University of Alberta,Alberta,Canada,200809,309852.0,Operating Grant,Operating Grants,Biomedical,Infection and Immunity,Avian Immunology; Avian Influenza; Host Immune Response To Viral Infection; Innate Immunity; Pattern Recognition Receptors; Rig-I Cytosolic Rna Helicase,"Ducks survive lethal strains of avian influenza due to a robust and controlled innate immune response. In contrast, chickens die in a few days. Our goal is to understand a successful innate immune response to lethal avian influenza, in the natural animal host, the duck.  This will provide the gold standard to mimic for therapeutic intervention in humans, and to inform animal vaccination strategies.  We are studying the detectors that initiate innate antiviral responses and instruct the memory response. A detector called RIG-I, critically important in human responses, is also present in ducks. This detector is the master control switch which turns on the antiviral response.  Notably, we are unable to find any evidence of RIG-I in chickens. This may be the reason that ducks survive influenza and chickens do not. We will determine whether duck RIG-I works to protect ducks against bird flu. The duck detector is very different from the human counterpart, so we want to know if it works better. Ultimately, our work will help us design safer vaccines for animals.",3 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=171975&lang=en
171999,The Genetic Epidemiology of Osteoporotic Fractures; From Suceptibility Genes to Susceptible Populations,Richards  Brent,"Richards, Brent",McGill University,Qu&eacute;bec,Canada,200809,300000.0,CIHR New Investigator,Salary Programs,Clinical,Musculoskeletal Health and Arthritis,Aging; Epidemiology; Fracture; Genetic Epidemiology; Human Genetics; Osteoporosis,"Osteoporotic fractures are a common and debilitating problem, which are strongly influenced by our genes. Although many environmentally determined risk factors for osteoporotic fractures have been identified, they are lacking in their ability to identify individuals at risk for fractures and furthermore, the genetic determinants of osteoporotic fractures are largely unknown. We propose to develop a resource of DNA samples of individuals who have experienced osteoporotic fractures to enable the identification of the pathways involved in susceptibility to osteoporotic fractures. We will then employ emerging technologies, in cooperation with international collaborators, to identify which genes predispose to such fractures; thus enabling the development of new therapies and targeting of preventive therapies to those at highest risk. Because the risks we are identifying are genetic, we hope to employ safe and practical interventions in persons who are at risk years before osteoporosis develops.",5 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=171999&lang=en
172001,Regulation of endothelial gene expression by epigenetic signalling pathways,Marsden  Philip A,"Marsden, Philip A",University of Toronto,Ontario,Canada,200809,758085.0,Operating Grant,Operating Grants,Biomedical,Circulatory and Respiratory Health,Chromatin; Cytokine Signaling; Dna Methylation; Histone; Histone Deacetylase; Transcription,"Diseases of the cardiovascular system, such as coronary heart disease  
and stroke due to atherosclerosis, are known to start in the vascular  
endothelium. This research laboratory has a long-term interest in  
understanding how endothelial genes are regulated in health and  
disease. We argue that we need to understand how genes are expressed  
in the endothelial cells of the body and how these pathways become  
abnormal in disease. What makes an endothelial gene turn off in  
diseased human blood vessels? Classically the nucleus has been viewed  
as the key regulator of gene expression. Yet all cells have the same  
DNA. Why do endothelial cells express only certain genes in healthy  
tissue? In disease many of these genes turn off. Why does the nucleus  
get affected? These processes are chromosome-based or chromatin-based,  
and are also called epigenetic processes. What we inherit from our  
parents, or what one cell passes on two cells when it divides,  
represents the ""nature"" side of the equation. These processes are  
influenced by the environment. This represents the ""nurture"" side of  
the equation. Whatever our cells sense in their external world  
interacts with genetic material in the nucleus to influence gene  
expression. Epigenetics is broadly defined as the mechanisms that  
control gene expression that do not involve the DNA sequence per se.  
We are among the first to study these concepts in the cardiovascular  
sciences. We believe that the principles we uncover in endothelial  
cells will teach us about blood vessels gene regulation in general.  
Our understanding of these newer concepts offers the hope of  
innovative approaches to preventing and treating the underlying  
problem in diseased blood vessels of patients. We anticipate findings  
that will provide important new insight into how genes are turned on  
and off in disease.",5 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=172001&lang=en
172005,Regulation of CaMKII activity by intracellular calcium pulsars in native endothelium,Ledoux  Jonathan,"Ledoux, Jonathan",Montreal Heart Institute,Qu&eacute;bec,Canada,200809,311839.0,Operating Grant,Operating Grants,Biomedical,Circulatory and Respiratory Health,Camkii; Confocal Microscopy; Electrophysiology; Endothelium; Hypertension; Intracellular Calcium,"The cells lining blood vessels are called endothelial cells and they are crucial in the control of blood pressure and vascular tone. Intracellular Ca2+ ions are key signalling molecules and are essential to endothelial cell functions that control vascular tone.  Our lab focuses on fundamental mechanisms involving intracellular Ca2+ and endothelial regulation of vascular function.  We have recently identified a unique Ca2+ signalling pathway in endothelium that is spontaneous and spatially restricted, and which we termed ""Ca2+ pulsars"".  This novel Ca2+ signal has been shown to activate proteins at the cell membrane called ion channels and is suggested to be involved in regulation of vascular function.  Calmodulin Kinase II (CaMKII) is an enzyme characterized by its unique ability to detect and interpret intracellular calcium signals in neurons and cardiac muscle cells.  Interestingly, CaMKII appear to be involved in both endothelial function and dysfunction.  However, the mechanisms underlying activation and regulation of CaMKII in endothelium remain to be established.  Therefore, we seek to determine the relationship between Ca2+ pulsars, the activation of CAMKII and their combined roles in vascular function.  State-of-the-art confocal microscopy on living tissue and novel fluorescent probes will be used in conjunction with challenging electrophysiological approaches to assess the impact of CaMKII and Ca2+ pulsars on membrane potential of vascular cells, therefore on vascular function.  Pathological alterations regarding the relationship between Ca2+ pulsars and CaMKII will be studied using a mouse model of hypertension.  Our work will provide novel insights on key mechanisms underlying the regulation of CaMKII and its involvement in endothelial function and dysfunction.  This research may provide crucial information regarding therapeutic targets for vascular disease such hypertension.",3 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=172005&lang=en
172008,Signaling through Toll-like receptors influences the regulation of coxsackieviral mediated autoimmune myocarditis,Horwitz  Marc S,"Horwitz, Marc S",University of British Columbia,British Columbia,Canada,200809,360787.0,Operating Grant,Operating Grants,Biomedical,Infection and Immunity,Coxsackievirus; Cytokines; Macrophages; Myocarditis; Toll-Like Receptors,"Myocarditis is a condition that results in inflammation of heart muscle.  It has been suggested that myocarditis and dilated cardiomyopathy (DCM) are successive stages of a progressive autoimmune disease of the heart.  This condition can progress to a stage that requires a heart transplantation or sudden death in young adults.  Myocarditis is often brought on by a viral infection.  In humans, coxsackie B viruses (CBV) are the most frequent cause of viral induced myocarditis.  It is estimated that 30% of new DCM cases in North America are the result of coxsackievirus infection. After viral infection, disease resistant individuals develop a short-lived disease while in other disease susceptible individuals the disease progresses to a chronic, autoimmune disease.  The objective of our project is to determine how disease progresses from the short-lived disease to the chronic disease.  As mice develop a similar disease to humans after CBV infection, we will be using disease resistant and disease susceptible mice to determine which cellular components are involved in causing long-term myocarditis. Using a variety of mice that are missing a single component of their immune system, we can determine which immune components are important in disease initiation. We will infect these mice with CBV and monitor them for development of chronic myocarditis.  If a mouse deficient of a certain component of their immune system doesn't develop the chronic disease after CBV infection, we will know that this component is likely involved in the progression from a short lived disease into a chronic disease. Alternatively, we will treat the mice with environmental agents that stimulate the immune system at the same time as CBV infection.  If adding these agents causes an increase in chronic disease, we will have identified important information with regard to how disease advances. In turn, these findings would translate into novel therapeutic approaches towards disease prevention.",3 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=172008&lang=en
172012,Mechanisms of insulin resistance of protein metabolism in human obesity,Marliss  Errol B,"Marliss, Errol B",Research Institute of the McGill University Health Centre,Qu&eacute;bec,Canada,200809,820467.0,Operating Grant,Operating Grants,Biomedical,"Nutrition, Metabolism and Diabetes",Insulin Resistance; Mass Spectrometry; Muscle Biopsies; Obesity; Protein Synthesis And Catabolism; Stable And Radioactive Isotope Studies,"Muscle is the principle tissue with high protein content in the body, so it plays a central role in the whole body's protein balance. Insulin is the main anabolic (tissue-building) hormone, and it affects protein metabolism during meal absorption and between meals.  How it increases muscle synthesis and decreases muscle breakdown are not fully understood. Furthermore, a prominent feature of obesity is that tissue responses to insulin's effects are blunted. When this reaches the point that hypersecretion of insulin to overcome this insulin resistance can no longer occur, high blood sugar, i.e., type 2 diabetes develops. We have shown insulin resistance of protein metabolism in obesity.  We wish to better understand this defect in obese persons, as the main objective of the proposed study. Specific amino acids from protein, especially leucine, also directly stimulate protein synthesis, and obesity may also have an as yet unrecognized defect at this level. To define these defects, we will use our method, the ""hyperinsulinemic, hyperglycemic, hyperaminoacidemic clamp"" test with studies of leg muscle.  In this, we raise insulin, glucose and amino acids (protein) to levels found after meals by giving them intravenously for several hours. This simulates the situation after a meal, during which most anabolism takes place. This will be combined with measurements in needle biopsies of the muscle. The biopsies will give direct access to tissue so that we can assess its rates of protein accretion in response to insulin and amino acids. The most novel aspect of the work is that we will be able to learn more about what happens inside the muscle cell that controls its rates of protein metabolism, including using ""gene-chip"" technology.  We expect that obese persons' muscle will be less responsive to the effects of insulin and amino acids. These studies can help not only basic understanding of obesity but also; to give insights into dietary requirements for treatment of obesity.",5 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=172012&lang=en
172017,Inherited Disorders of Vitamin B12 Metabolism,Gravel  Roy A,"Gravel, Roy A",University of Calgary,Alberta,Canada,200809,1153080.0,Operating Grant,Operating Grants,Biomedical,Genetics,Caenorhabditis Elegans; Complementation Groups; Mitochondria; Mutation; Protein Complex; Vitamin B12,"Vitamin B12 is an essential nutrient by helping maintain the metabolic activity of all cells. At least eight genetic diseases have been discovered which are blocked in the metabolism of vitamin B12 to its active forms, resulting in severe, potentially fatal illnesses in children. Our goal has been to identify the affected genes and determine how vitamin B12 is metabolized in cells. To date, seven of the genes have been identified and, with our colleagues, we have identified five of them. In the last grant period, we investigated the biochemical steps governed by the newly identified genes, investigated the mutations causing B12 diseases in patients and have continued to search for additional genes in human cells and other organisms that use B12 as a nutrient. We now propose to investigate the mechanism by which B12 is metabolized in human cells. We predict the existence of protein complexes, or small self-contained factories, in cells that process B12 to active form from beginning to end. We will isolate the complexes, determine their composition and how they metabolize B12 and how the predicted complexes are disrupted in patients. Our studies will increase our knowledge of vitamin B12 metabolism in humans and lead to the therapeutic strategies for the treatment of affected patients.",5 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=172017&lang=en
172023,BDNF/TRPC Signal Transduction in Bipolar Disorder and Mood Stabilizer Action,Warsh  Jerry J,"Warsh, Jerry J",Centre for Addiction and Mental Health (Toronto),Ontario,Canada,200809,305193.0,Operating Grant,Operating Grants,Biomedical,"Neurosciences, Mental Health and Addiction",Bdnf; Bipolar Disorder; Neuronal Precursors; Neuroplasticity; Pathophysiology; Signal Transduction,"Bipolar disorder (BD) is characterized by severe mood episodes, high comorbidity, and functional deterioration, carrying a suicide rate of approximately 15%. Several molecular pathways have been identified in the disease processes in BD. Neurotrophic factors, implicated in BD, are growth factors important in these pathways and in survival of brain tissue. Specifically, Brain Derived Neurotrophic Factor (BDNF) is decreased in B lymphoblast cell lines (BLCLs) and serum of manic and depressed BD patients, and increases with antidepressant and mood stabilizer treatment, as observed in human post-mortem hippocampus and serum studies of depressed subjects. BDNF action has been linked to specific cell membrane calcium channels, the type 3 and type 6 canonical Transient Receptor Potential (TRPC) channels, which regulate calcium entry into cells thereby generating calcium signalling in the cell. BDNF-TRPC3/6 activation has been implicated in cellular survival, and recently enhanced TRPC3-like activity has been observed in BLCLs from patients with BD. The study of peripheral models such as BLCLs is advantageous given the difficulty in accessing live human brain tissue. The general objective of this research proposal is to test whether the BDNF/TRPC3 association established in other cell lines holds true in BLCLs, and secondly, to determine how this BDNF-TRPC3 interaction is impaired in BD subjects and involved in the mechanism of action of mood stabilizing medications. We will also extend our findings into human neuronal models, to give a closer approximation of what happens in neurons in the brain. Examining the relationship between BDNF and TRPC3 in BLCLs from BD subjects, and extending these findings into neuronal models, will allow for a better understanding of the disease process of BD in these reporter models, and provide a stronger link between cellular models and the brain. This will also guide new medication discovery for bipolar disorder.",3 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=172023&lang=en
172024,Probing the Temporal Dynamics of Tumor Cell Kill and Vascular Damage in Radiation Therapy using Optical Molecular Imaging Techniques,Dacosta  Ralph S,"Dacosta, Ralph S",University Health Network (Toronto),Ontario,Canada,200809,347478.0,Operating Grant,Operating Grants,Biomedical,Cancer Research,Hypoxia; Optical Molecular Imaging; Radiation Response; Temporal Dynamics; Tumor Cell Death; Vascular Damage,"Radiation therapy (RT) plays a significant role in cancer treatment, and has until recently been thought to be curative by mainly killing tumor cells directly by damaging their genetic material (DNA). However, recent findings indicate that the tumor vascularity is also a major determinant of radiation response. Currently, advanced volumetric imaging techniques are employed to guide the delivery of RT in patients based on changes in the tumor's size or volume (i.e., geometric/anatomical metrics) over the course of treatment. Treatments are largely empirically derived and ignore variations in the radiosusceptibility of the vascular component. What is critically needed is a more biologically-informed way to optimize conventional radiation treatment. Therefore, the long-term goal of this project is to optimize radiation treatment based on the biological (vascular) responses monitored 'on-line' during treatment. The immediate goals of this first 3-year phase are a) to better understand the dynamic processes involved in tumor cell death, vascular damage and tumor microenvironment signaling during response to radiation therapy and b) to develop and validate optical 'smart' probes of vascular/cellular responses that could ultimately be used for minimally-invasive and real-time monitoring of these molecular signals to enable adaptively optimized treatment in individual patients. We will exploit advanced optical imaging technologies combined with emerging molecularly-sensitive 'smart' optical agents to probe the temporal dynamics of tumor cell death and vascular damage caused by radiation therapy at cellular and molecular levels. We believe that this will lay the groundwork for future 'breakthrough' strategies of this treatment modality, thus profoundly impacting the effectiveness of clinical radiation therapy.",3 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=172024&lang=en
172026,Diagnostic and prognostic biomarkers for epithelial ovarian cancer,Jurisica  Igor,"Jurisica, Igor; Oza, Amit M",University Health Network (Toronto),Ontario,Canada,200809,643742.0,Operating Grant,Operating Grants,Biomedical,Cancer Research,Bioinformatics; Biomarker Discovery; Early Diagnosis; Epithelial Ovarian Cancer,"Mortality rate from epithelial ovarian cancer (EOC) is higher than that of any other cancer among women in the North America, with staggering 63%.   Currently, 75% of new cases are not diagnosed until the disease is in its late stages of development, when treatment is less effective, resulting in low survival rates. Despite this high death rate, ovarian cancer is treatable, and has a survival rate of 90% when detected early. Unfortunately, early diagnosis is difficult because of the physically inaccessible location of the ovaries, the lack of specific symptoms in early stages of disease, and the limited understanding of ovarian oncogenesis

The overall goal of our research is to identify molecular pathways responsible for initiation or progression of EOC based on which clinicians will be able to implement individualized molecular diagnosis and treatment of this disease. The goal of this proposal is to validate subset of the identified putative biomarkers as indicators of disease onset, progression or treatment response.",4 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=172026&lang=en
172034,The role of podocalyxin in hematopoietic and vascular function,McNagny  Kelly M,"McNagny, Kelly M",University of British Columbia,British Columbia,Canada,200809,550970.0,Operating Grant,Operating Grants,Biomedical,Infection and Immunity,Asymetric Cell Division; Bone Marrow Transplantation; Cancer; Cell Adhesion; Confocal Microscopy; Flow Cytometry; Hematopoietic Stem Cells; Hemopoiesis; Homing And Migration; Leukocyte Trafficking; Metastasis; Molecular Biology; Transgenic Mice; Vascular Endothelia; Video Microscopy,"All blood cells, including those that help fight infection, transport oxygen or stop bleeding by forming clots at the site of a wound are derived from a very rare stem cell in the bone marrow.  These cells are an extremely valuable clinical commodity since they can be used to regenerate all blood cells of the body in patients with genetic diseases or undergoing treatment for cancer.  My laboratory is studying a family of cell surface proteins expressed by these rare cells in order to understand how they help regulate stem cell behavior. We have preliminary data to suggest that one of these proteins, podocalyxin, regulates the trafficking of the stem cells to the appropriate site in the bone marrow during transplantation and that it also regulates the expansion of these cells once they reach this site.  The goal of this project is to clarify the molecular mechanisms governing this behavior with the long-term goal of manipulating podocalyxin's role in stem cell migration and expansion for clinical therapy.  Since we also have evidence that this mechanism is subverted by a variety of tumors, this could also lead to approaches to suppressing tumor metastasis.",5 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=172034&lang=en
172038,"Effect of 1,25 dihydroxyvitamin D on control of cell growth and differentiation",Kremer  Richard B,"Kremer, Richard B",McGill University,Qu&eacute;bec,Canada,200809,569552.0,Operating Grant,Operating Grants,Biomedical,Musculoskeletal Health and Arthritis,Cancer; Coactivators; Gene Regulation; Keratinocytes; Knock-Out; Vitamin D,"The fundamental action of vitamin D in the treatment and prevention of rickets was discovered over 60 years ago, but it is only recently that this compound was shown to have unique properties for treating cancer and osteoporosis. As vitamin D has no intrinsic activity, prior to its action it must be converted to 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D (1,25(OH)2D), a powerful inhibitor of cell growth in many types of cells. However, many questions remain on how 1,25(OH)2D regulates these functions, and under which conditions and in which form(s) it should be administered. We have recently elucidated some fundamental questions on how 1,25(OH)2D acts at the cellular and molecular levels and we propose to translate these discoveries into broad applications in cancer and non-cancer states. First we discovered that phosphorylation of a central switch in the cell machinery, the retinoid X receptor (RXR), rendered the action of vitamin D ineffective in skin cancer cells, leading to a defect I called ""relative vitamin D resistance in cancer cells"". Our efforts are now focusing on how RXR phosphorylation perturbs the cellular machinery, and on devising strategies to reverse this phenomenon. We also discovered that cancer cells themselves could be used advantageously to treat cancer in a simple and effective way, with little side effects. Indeed, we have shown recently that inactive vitamin D can be metabolically activated within cancer cells and suppress cancer growth and metastasis to bone. Our next objective is to better understand this phenomenon by engineering mouse models in which the cells are unable to metabolize vitamin D into its active form. These models will be used to better understand the mechanism of action of vitamin D in skeletal metastasis prevention and treatment.
Overall, our research program remains committed to better define the role of vitamin D in health and disease, and to generate unique therapies to treat cancer and other diseases.",4 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=172038&lang=en
172044,Mechanisms of Retinopathy of Prematurity: Role of PAR-2 in restoration of retinal microvascular bed,Chemtob  Sylvain,"Chemtob, Sylvain","Centre hospitalier universitaire Sainte-Justine (Montr&eacute;al, Qu&eacute;bec)",Qu&eacute;bec,Canada,200809,612456.0,Operating Grant,Operating Grants,Biomedical,"Human Development, Child and Youth Health",Cell Death; Endothelium; Nitric Oxide; Nitrosative Stress; Oxidative Stress; Retina,"Retinopathy of prematurity (ROP) is the major serious eye disorder of the child. This condition is associated with long term complications, including strabismus, myopia, abnormal color discrimination, and blindness. ROP evolves from a relatively high extrauterine oxygen exposure of the premature child, which results in arrest in vascular development and degeneration of present vasculature. This anomaly leads to an excessive attempt of the tissue to repair itself, leading to abundant neovascularization that penetrates the vitreous, and predisposes to hazardous retinal detachment. Our laboratory has identified numerous mediators that cause vascular degeneration and new ones that are proliferative. However, to date the mechanisms that unable vessels to reform in vascular depleted areas are unknown. If one would identify these factors, desirable therapies can be envisaged. 
We therefore set out to begin to tackle this challenge and have identified a notable candidate, namely protease-activated receptor type 2. Activation of this receptor restores vascularity of the vascular depleted areas of the retina in ROP models. This important pilot information sets the basis of our current grant application, and opens the door for readily amenable therapeutics, superior to currently utilized ones.",5 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=172044&lang=en
172048,c-Myb-dependent proliferation & differentiation of vascular smooth muscle cells,Husain  Mansoor,"Husain, Mansoor",University Health Network (Toronto),Ontario,Canada,200809,758854.0,Operating Grant,Operating Grants,Biomedical,Circulatory and Respiratory Health,Atherosclerosis; C-Myb; Cell Cycle; Development; Smooth Muscle Cell; Transcriptional Regulation,"Heart attack and stroke occur because of hardening of the arteries, which remains the leading cause of death in our society. The unregulated growth of vessel smooth muscle cells (VSMC) is a key feature of this condition. Despite enormous efforts aimed at understanding why VSMC undergo disease-causing growth, it is unfortunate how little of our knowledge has translated into successful treatments. We believe that these difficulties are due to redundancies inherent in biological systems and the failure of therapies aimed at single targets. Accordingly, we have focused our efforts on improving our understanding of the final common pathway of events controlling cell division. It is also noteworthy that the ability of adult VSMC to grow by dividing is unique among muscle cells, as heart and skeletal muscle cells lose their ability to divide following their differentiation from their muscle precursor cells. By contrast, the property of VSMC to continue to divide following differentiation is the very basis of their disease-causing potential. Studying the unique differentiation and development of VSMC may thus help explain how they cause disease.",5 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=172048&lang=en
172050,Dignity and distress across end-of-life populations,Chochinov  Harvey M,"Chochinov, Harvey M",University of Manitoba,Manitoba,Canada,200809,532908.0,Operating Grant,Operating Grants,Clinical,Aging,Als; Copd; Dignity Distress; End-Stage Renal Disease; Frail Elderly; Palliative Care,"Maintaining the dignity of patients who are approaching death is often cited as the clinical, philosophical, and moral foundation of palliative care. Research into the sources of dignity-related distress can provide tangible guidance on how to deliver holistic, quality, dignity-conserving, end-of-life care. To date, research into stressors that compromise dignity in those at the end of life has focused almost exclusively on cancer patients. We now need to examine dimensions of dignity and distress in those with other life-threatening diseases or conditions, in order to clarify and address the broad spectrum of suffering they carry. In Canada, there are several groups of people who do not regularly access palliative care, but who could benefit from it: those with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS), end stage renal disease (ESRD), chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD), as well as the frail elderly. In this study, we will interview people from each of those four groups and their family caregivers to explore the factors related to dignity-related distress. We will use a new screening tool, the Patient Dignity Inventory, to help us identify the nature of their distress. We will compare the sources of their suffering and examine how this distress changes over time. This exploration will provide pivotal information in laying the groundwork for the provision of dignity-conserving palliative care for non-cancer populations approaching death.",3 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=172050&lang=en
172053,Polymeric membrane lactobacillus formulation for use in type II diabetes.,Prakash  Satya,"Prakash, Satya",McGill University,Qu&eacute;bec,Canada,200809,386196.0,Operating Grant,Operating Grants,Biomedical,"Nutrition, Metabolism and Diabetes",Diabetes Mellitus; Feruloyl Esterase; Microcpsule; Polymeric Membrane,"Recent changes in human diet and lifestyle have resulted in a dramatic increase in number of diabetics worldwide. The continuous use of currently available synthetic drugs has associated limitations. This proposal is an attempt to address the urgent need to develop a safe, natural and economical strategy to treat or prevent the emerging global epidemic of type 2 diabetes. A novel oral artificial cell microcapsule formulation incorporating live feruloyl esterase active probiotic bacterial cells has been developed.  We have obtained very encouraging preliminary results indicating the potential of this formulation in type 2 diabetes. Here, we propose to investigate the feasibility, suitability, mode of action and pre-clinical efficacy of this formulation in an experimental animal model. If successful, this formulation will be used to treat and/or prevent type 2 diabetes. In addition, this study will be a step towards exploiting the important potential of non-pathogenic FAE active bacterial cells for future clinical applications.",3 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=172053&lang=en
172064,High-resolution measurements of mitotic spindle dynamics during the cell cycle,Kilfoil  Maria L,"Kilfoil, Maria L; Vogel, Jackie",McGill University,Qu&eacute;bec,Canada,200809,253596.0,Operating Grant,Operating Grants,Biomedical,Genetics,Automated Phenotyping; Cell Biology; Cell Division; Cytoskeleton; Experimental Biophysics; Microscopy And Image Analysis,"Mitosis is the last stage of the division of a mother cell into two daughter cells. Early in mitosis, each duplicated chromosome becomes attached to microtubules, dynamic fibers that originate at opposite poles of the spindle. Next, the spindle increases in length while the microtubules attached to the chromosomes shorten, separating the chromosome pairs into two while moving them from the spindle center towards one of the two poles. In some cells, such as precursors to eggs and stem cells, division results in daughter cells that are unequal in size and have very different fates. In this case, the spindle must be asymmetrically positioned within the mother for the cleavage of the mother cell into unequal daughter cells. While the process of asymmetric cell division is apparently simple and elegant, we know little about how it occurs. How does the spindle find its proper position in the cell? How is this process timed such that the spindle is properly positioned after chromosomes are attached to microtubules, but before cleavage begins? With what landmarks in the cell and through what signaling does the spindle communicate during this process? Failure to properly coordinate spindle assembly with its translocation and with the onset of chromosome segregation can result in a cell with an abnormal number of chromosomes, a cause of cancer and birth defects. We propose to study this in budding yeast, simple asymmetrically dividing cell. We will also study how the cell organizes its mass in such a way that cell size is constant from one generation to the next. Budding yeast as a model system is manageable for extracting fine detail and for perturbing genetically, has a convenient length of life cycle and even happens to be a convenient geometry, but still shares all of the same force generators and cell architecture that our cells have. Our studies will increase our understanding of general principles of cell division and the causes of abnormal chromosome number in cells.",3 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=172064&lang=en
172068,REnal Function as a predictor of Vascular events In noncardiac Surgery patients cOhort evaluatioN (RE-VISION),Devereaux  Philip J,"Devereaux, Philip J; Garg, Amit",McMaster University,Ontario,Canada,200809,249184.0,Operating Grant,Operating Grants,Clinical,Circulatory and Respiratory Health,Acute Kidney Injury; Chronic Kidney Disease; Cohort; Cystatin C; Major Vascular Complications; Noncardiac Surgery,"Worldwide, over 200 million patients undergo major surgeries each year. Unfortunately, millions of these patients will suffer a major cardiovascular event such as a heart attack, stroke or death after these surgeries. At present, we have a limited ability to predict which patients will suffer such an event. Improving our ability to predict which patients are at risk of these events may allow us to develop interventions specifically to reduce their risk. Kidney function is an important component of predicting the risk for cardiovascular events and we are proposing to undertake the Re-VISION Study to investigate two areas of kidney function around the time of surgery. 
   Poor kidney function before a surgery is an increasingly common problem. Our previous research has demonstrated that even small reductions in kidney function are an important factor in determining patients' overall risk. Cystatin C is a new marker that improves the measurement of kidney function and, in non-surgery patients, is a powerful predictor of cardiovascular events. We will study the relationship between pre-operative cystatin C levels and the development of cardiovascular events 30 days after surgery as well as pre-operative cystatin C levels and cardiovascular events and kidney function 1 year after surgery.
   The kidneys can also have a decrease in function at the time of the surgery termed an acute kidney injury. Acute kidney injuries are strong predictors of death and are very costly to the health care system. There is currently no good way to predict who will develop an acute kidney injury after surgery. We will measure kidney function after surgery in all our participants and then develop a simple tool using features of the patient before surgery that accurately predicts who will develop acute kidney injury. Additionally, we look at the impact of acute kidney injury on cardiovascular events at 30 days and on kidney function and cardiovascular events at 1 year.",3 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=172068&lang=en
172077,Vascular events In noncardiac Surgery patIents cOhort evaluatioN (VISION) Study,Devereaux  Philip J,"Devereaux, Philip J",McMaster University,Ontario,Canada,200809,565512.0,Operating Grant,Operating Grants,Social / Cultural / Environmental / Population Health,Population and Public Health,Clinically Silent Myocardial Infarctions; Cohort; Long-Term Prognostic Capabilities Of Post Surgery Troponin; Major Perioperative Vascular Complications; Noncardiac Surgery,"Because people are living longer they are now living long enough to develop conditions that require a wide variety of surgeries including, for instance, knee and hip replacement.  Worldwide, over 200 million major noncardiac surgeries occur annually, and in Canada 500,000 adults undergo such surgery every year.  We, however, do not know how many major vascular complications - such as heart attacks, cardiac arrests, strokes, or death from these causes - occur when patients have surgery, and we do not know the best way to estimate a patient's risk of such complications.  Further, we do not know if a simple blood test after surgery will help doctors to avoid missing heart attacks after surgery and predict a patient's risk of death at 1 year after surgery.  We will undertake a study to address these issues.  

Our study will determine: how many patients have a major vascular complication (i.e., heart attack, cardiac arrest, stroke, or death from these causes) within 30 days of surgery; the best method to predict these complications; how many patients have a heart attack after surgery without symptoms; and if these heart attacks affect patient health over the following year.  Knowing the current number of major vascular complications after surgery will inform decision makers about the resources required to confront this problem; and knowing the best method to estimate a patient's risk of such a complication around the time of surgery will allow patients and physicians to make informed decisions about the appropriateness of surgery.  Finally if a simple blood test after surgery can identify heart attacks that would go unrecognized and predict major vascular events at 1 year this will allow physicians to provide appropriate timely treatments to help these patients survive to enjoy the benefits of their surgery.",4 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=172077&lang=en
172080,Mechanisms of the anti-cancer actions of arsenic.,Miller  Wilson H,"Miller, Wilson H",CIUSSS de Centre-Ouest-de-l'Ile-de-Montr&eacute;al-Jewish General,Qu&eacute;bec,Canada,200809,851780.0,Operating Grant,Operating Grants,Biomedical,Cancer Research,Arsenic; Biomarkers; Exploratory Translational Cancer Research; Novel Pharmaceutical Agent; Signaling; Targeted Therapy,"Although considerable progress has been made in understanding the biology of cancer, effective novel therapeutics are still urgently needed in human malignancies.  We have studied the mechanism of action of arsenic and found that it turns on specific cellular signaling pathways and can induce cancer cells to undergo a form of programmed cell death.  Through understanding of these signaling pathways, we can develop combinations with other drugs currently used or under development.  This application proposes to further study the mechanisms by which arsenic kills tumor cells and use arsenic to enhance the tumor killing with other drugs.  Our goal is to increase anti-tumor activity without significantly increasing toxicity to the normal cells.",5 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=172080&lang=en
172081,"The Metabolic Syndrome in Patients with Systemic Lupus Erythematosus (SLE): Clinical, Therapeutic and Genetic Determinants in an International Inception Cohort Registry",Urowitz  Murray B,"Urowitz, Murray B",University Health Network (Toronto),Ontario,Canada,200809,575850.0,Operating Grant,Operating Grants,Clinical,Musculoskeletal Health and Arthritis,Atherosclerotic Risk; Biomarkers; Genetics; Longitudinal Cohort; Metabolic Syndrome; Systemic Lupus,"Premature heart disease is a significant problem in patients with lupus.  We have found that a pre-diabetic state (the metabolic syndrome) is more common in SLE but the causes are unclear.  This pre-diabetic state is itself an important risk factor for the development of future heart disease.  We suspect that steroid therapy and inflammation related to the condition together cause this problem to develop.

This study, which is based on an international collaboration and collection of a large number of patients with SLE from the onset of their disease followed forward, will examine what factors in SLE over time increase the risk of developing the metabolic syndrome.  In particular, we wish to study whether certain SLE patients inherit a greater sensitivity to steroids that increase their risk of developing this pre-diabetic state.  This study will allow us to understand better the risks associated with steroid therapy in SLE and to help us better target steroid doses on an individual basis.  It will also help us suggest ways to reduce the risk of future heart disease in SLE.",3 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=172081&lang=en
172083,Exploring the Genetic Architecture of ADHD Phenotypes and Endophenotypes in a General Population Sample,Schachar  Russell J,"Schachar, Russell J; Crosbie, Jennifer",Hospital for Sick Children (Toronto),Ontario,Canada,200809,1049785.0,Operating Grant,Operating Grants,Biomedical,"Neurosciences, Mental Health and Addiction",Attention Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder; Copy Number Variants; Endophenotypes; Extreme Trait Analyses; Genome Wide Association,"Attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) is a common, persistent, impairing and highly heritable mental illness of childhood.  While interesting clues to the genetics of ADHD have been found, replication of results is rare and little of the variance has been explained. We propose an alternative approach which utilizes a powerful, feasible and cost-effective design combining the comprehensiveness of a genome-wide approach, the statistical efficiency of a quantitative, extreme-trait design in a general population sample, and the power of a quantitative cognitive endophenotype (response inhibition). The proposed approach is designed to afford increased power to single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) and copy number variants (CNVs) in ADHD individuals. We will conduct a multi-stage study. Stage 1 involves the collection of behavioural, cognitive and genetic data from 7000 children and adolescents (ages 7-18, of European background) attending the Ontario Science Centre. We will identify the extremes of ADHD traits (most severe and least severe 10%) and we will identify the extremes of response inhibition (most and least severe 10%). We will perform a quantitative, extreme-trait GWA analysis to investigate SNPs and CNVs in these extreme groups. In Stage 2, we will follow-up1236 selected SNPs from Stage 1 by studying 400 rigorously assessed ADHD cases and low trait controls.  In Stage 2, CNVs identified in Stage 1 will be replicated in a separate study of 200 rigorously diagnosed ADHD clinic cases. Hypothesis 1: One or more SNPs will be identified as significantly associated with the ADHD and/or response inhibition across Stages 1 and 2. Hypothesis 2: Based our own recent preliminary data of CNVs in ADHD, we predict that unique CNVs will be identified in between 30-40% of individuals in the extreme tails of the distribution of ADHD and inhibition trait measures. The proposed study has the potential to identify novel genomic regions for intensive investigation.",4 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=172083&lang=en
172094,Estimating treatment effects for uncommon disease using observational data in a Bayesian context. The warfarin in scleroderma-pulmonary hypertension model.,Feldman  Brian M,"Feldman, Brian M",Hospital for Sick Children (Toronto),Ontario,Canada,200809,104651.0,Operating Grant,Operating Grants,Clinical,Musculoskeletal Health and Arthritis,Bayesian; Observational Study; Pulmonary Hypertension; Scleroderma,"Scleroderma (SSc) is a disease that can affect the skin, joints and internal organs (heart, lungs, kidneys). There is no cure. The leading cause of death for Canadians with SSc is high pressure in the lungs called pulmonary arterial hypertension (PAH). Some experts suggest use of a blood thinner called warfarin for patients with PAH. A major side effect of warfarin is that it can cause severe bleeding. Whether this drug improves survival is not known. Using a novel research approach, this series of 3 studies will evaluate if warfarin improves survival in SSc-PAH and idiopathic-PAH (I-PAH). 
Part 1 will study if warfarin improves survival by comparing the survival of SSc-PAH and I-PAH patients who did and did not take warfarin. Part 2 will study specialists' beliefs about the benefits/risks of warfarin to determine if there is enough evidence to affect patient care. Part 3, a decision analysis, will inform patients and doctors about how the risks/benefits of warfarin compare with newer, more expensive treatment options. This program of research will be the first to study if warfarin improves survival in this deadly disease, and will develop innovative research methods for all researchers who study rare diseases.",2 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=172094&lang=en
172095,Evaluation of a Practice-Modifying Knowledge Translation Program,Dormuth  Colin R,"Dormuth, Colin R",University of British Columbia,British Columbia,Canada,200809,160042.0,Operating Grant,Operating Grants,Health systems / services,Health Services and Policy Research,Dissemination; Drug Utilization; Education; Evaluation; Knowledge Translation; Prescribing Impacts,"Health care outcomes could be improved and money saved if prescribers adhered to antihypertesive therapy guidelines. We will measure impacts of confidential prescribing portraits with price information and evidence of drug effectiveness, plus small participation incentives, on prescribing by general practitioners (GPs).",3 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=172095&lang=en
172099,The behavioral readout of long term plasticity is an active molecular process.,Nader  Karim K,"Nader, Karim K",McGill University,Qu&eacute;bec,Canada,200809,684030.0,Operating Grant,Operating Grants,Biomedical,"Neurosciences, Mental Health and Addiction",Consolidation; Memory Expression; Plasticity; Receptor Trafficking,"The mechanisms involved in memory storage have been intensively studied during the last decades. These investigations gave rise to the now dominant view that protein-synthesis dependent processes are required to store memories over time.  Early studies demonstrating that protein-synthesis inhibitors (PSIs) disrupt memory storage when administered shortly after learning also suggested that the expression of long-term memory during a retention test is not impaired when protein-synthesis is inhibited by systemic PSI injections.  Since then, memory expression has been modeled as a relatively passive readout of memory representations that does not engage the molecular, protein-synthesis dependent mechanisms engaged during learning.  Mainly for this reason, little is known about the molecular events associated with memory expression.  We will attempt to shed some light on this area using behavioral paradigms.  Employing drugs targeting specific molecular pathways that were thought to only be involved in learning, we will challenge memory expression, and monitor changes in expression of receptors associated with memory formation.  So far, we have striking results suggesting that memory expression might be mediated by rather dynamic molecular mechanisms.  If the experiments proposed here confirm these findings, our current understanding of how memory is expressed would be in need for fundamental revision.  The implications would not only be of theoretical nature, but would touch directly on the clinical treatment of memory related disorders. For example, the clinician may be able to control retrieval of specific memories in patients suffering from aversive, traumatic experiences, and, on the other hand, may help those who suffer from apparent amnesia, in cases where this memory loss represents a failure in the retrieval of memory that still exists but is repressed.",5 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=172099&lang=en
172117,Prostanoid Signaling in Diabetic Nephropathy,Kennedy  Christopher R,"Kennedy, Christopher R",Ottawa Hospital Research Institute,Ontario,Canada,200809,333582.0,Operating Grant,Operating Grants,Biomedical,"Nutrition, Metabolism and Diabetes",Cell Signaling; Diabetic Nephropathy; Gene-Targeted Mice; Podocyte; Prostanoid Receptors; Proteinuria,"In diabetes, kidney disease can result when highly specialized cells, known as podocytes become injured.  Once damaged, these podocytes can no longer help filter the blood since they allow proteins into urine, a condition known as proteinuria. This condition can be improved by nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) such as Aspirin, Motrin, and ibuprofen.  These drugs block the production of hormones known as prostanoids. These prostanoids carry out their roles by stimulating a series of receptors located throughout the kidney - including the podocytes.  Unfortunately NSAIDs are rarely used in the clinic since they can bring about adverse side effects on the kidney by reducing blood flow.  Thus prostanoids apparently contribute to 'protective' and 'damaging' processes in the kidney.  We wish to identify the target of these drugs which mediates proteinuria in type I diabetes, so that newer - more specific drugs could be designed to avoid the 'protective' receptors while targeting those which 'damage' the filters of the kidney.  Our research program generates mice with altered levels of these prostanoid hormone receptors and subjects them to models of human kidney disease. We can then ascertain whether proteinuria is blocked or worsened. Demonstration of critical role for specific prostanoid receptors in diabetic kidney disease may identify therapeutic targets for new drugs.",3 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=172117&lang=en
172119,St. James Town Initiative: Investigating Neighbourhood Effects on Mental Health and Wellbeing of Newcomers,Haque  Nasim,"Haque, Nasim","Wellesley Institute (Toronto, Ontario)",Ontario,Canada,200809,69500.0,Operating Grant,Operating Grants,Social / Cultural / Environmental / Population Health,Population and Public Health,An Indepth  Case Study; Ethno-Racial And Gender Differentials; Immigrant Residents; Mental Health And Wellbeing; Neighbourhood Factors; Pseudo Longitudinal Study,"Nearly one in five Canadian adults experience a mental illness and this illness disproportionately affects people living in poor neighbourhoods. The total direct and indirect cost of mental health problems was estimated to be dollar14.4 billion in 1998, placing it among the most expensive health conditions in Canada. In order to design cost effective interventions at the community level, prevention efforts must be informed by an understanding of how social determinants of health (SDOH) affect mental health, and the pathways between SDOH, and mental health and wellbeing. The specific aims of our study are:
AIM 1 : To explore neighbourhood factors in St. James Town that influence newcomers' and non-immigrants health and wellbeing.
AIM 2: To examine the processes and mechanisms that will help explain the relationships between social determinants of health at the neighbourhood level and health outcomes.
This proposed research is using the St. James Town (SJT) neighbourhood of Toronto as a case study to explore the implications of perceived neighbourhood attributes on mental health and wellbeing of newcomers. Using a cross-sectional design this study will capture gender specific experiences of two major groups (a) newcomers i.e. Chinese, Tamil, and Filipino and (b) non-immigrant. The study will gather data through structured face-to-face interviews of 1500 adults in the language of the participants.
The findings from this case study will help the development of strategies that promote community mobilization and help newcomer communities influence public policy, secure improved local services, and build on existing successful community strengths that promote mental health and wellbeing.",1 yr 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=172119&lang=en
172127,Magnetic Resonance Imaging for Ischemic Heart Disease,Wright  Graham A,"Wright, Graham A","Sunnybrook Research Institute (Toronto, Ontario)",Ontario,Canada,200809,830540.0,Operating Grant,Operating Grants,Biomedical,Circulatory and Respiratory Health,Ischemic Heart Disease; Magnetic Resonance Imaging; Mathematical Modeling; Tissue Characterization; Ventricular Tachycardia,"A major cause of sudden death is the development of a sustained very rapid heart rate associated with damage to cardiac muscle due to reduced blood supply. Several treatments have been developed to avoid this situation including the use of drugs to manage heart rate, implantable devices to reset the heart rate if an irregular rhythm is detected, and interventions where segments of cardiac muscle are destroyed to avoid conditions which can cause the rapid heart rate. Unfortunately, it is difficult to predict who will benefit from these therapies. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) is proving very effective in characterizing damage to the cardiac muscle. Several studies  suggest that such information can be used to better manage patients at risk of sudden death due to sustained rapid heart rates. Our goal is to better understand how such information is related to the underlying causes of this condition and to exploit this information to improve patient management. To do so, we plan to characterize the movement of electrical signals in the heart via correlation of  electrical properties to spatial maps of tissue damage determined from MR images, studying these measurements initially in animal models and explanted hearts,and finally in patients at risk of developing rapid heart rates. Through these studies, we hope to be able to better plan and assess interventions aimed at adjusting the electrical circuitry of the heart, yielding better outcomes for this patient population.",5 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=172127&lang=en
172129,Cx43 mutations linked to human disease,Laird  Dale W,"Laird, Dale W; Bai, Donglin; Kidder, Gerald M",Western University (Ontario),Ontario,Canada,200809,820325.0,Operating Grant,Operating Grants,Biomedical,Musculoskeletal Health and Arthritis,Connexins; Disease; Gap Junctions; Mutations,"In normal human physiology, most cells directly talk to each other through specialized conduits or channels that are built between contacting cells within tissues and organs. The protein molecules used to assemble these specialized cell-cell channels, known as gap junctions, are called connexins. Inherited mutations in the genes that encode these connexins cause severe diseases ranging from deafness to developmental disorders. Most organs in the human body express one particular member of the connexin family called connexin43. Inherited mutations in this connexin lead to a wide range of developmental abnormalities in the hands, feet, facial bone and teeth, and frequently cause chronic disease of the bladder, eyes and nerves. Our group has specialized and published extensively on this disease known as oculodentodigital dysplasia. In the present application, we will use cell and mouse models of oculodentodigital dysplasia to examine how connexin43 mutations lead to moderate or severe disease in some tissues but cause little or no disease in other organs where connexin43 is present. Importantly, we will obtain cells and tissues from patients suffering from this disease to facilitate our studies. Through our multidisciplinary approach of using genetically manipulated cells, mouse models of the disease and human samples from patients, we will provide much needed insight into the basis of how connexin43 mutations cause disease. Finally, our studies should provide important leads into potential therapeutic interventions that may alleviate the severity of the disease in patients suffering from chronic and degenerative problems.",5 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=172129&lang=en
172135,MHC II antigen presentation: Modulation by E3-ubiquitin ligases of the MARCH family,Thibodeau  Jacques,"Thibodeau, Jacques",Universit&eacute; de Montr&eacute;al,Qu&eacute;bec,Canada,200809,497805.0,Operating Grant,Operating Grants,Biomedical,Infection and Immunity,Antigen Presentation; Cytokines; Dendritic Cells; E3 Ubiquitin Ligase; Mhc Class Ii; Monocytes,"The immune system protects humans against pathogens and inflammation (redness, heat, swelling...) is part of the healing process. However, the body must put an end to these reactions in order to prevent complications and even auto-immune diseases. We have identified a molecule (MARCH1) that acts as a brake in the presence of anti-inflammatory messages such as the cytokine IL-10. MARCH1 acts by modifying the structure of other proteins through the addition of a ubiquitin tag. Our goal is to understand the regulation of MARCH1  in immune cells, identify its molecular targets and to characterize its structure and function. These results will help understanding inflammation, autoimmunity and possibly control organ transplantation.",5 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=172135&lang=en
172149,Novel mechanisms of PDK1 and MEKK3 regulation,Scheid  Michael P,"Scheid, Michael P","York University (Toronto, Ontario)",Ontario,Canada,200809,322998.0,Operating Grant,Operating Grants,Biomedical,Cancer Research,Cancer; Cell Biology; Growth Factor Receptors; Molecular Biology; Proteins Kinases; Signal Transduction,"Cancer is a disease in which cells of the body become growth deregulated. During development, cell division is normal and is controlled by signals transmitted by a class of proteins called kinases. Normally, the growth of cells is tightly controlled. During cancer, the control of some kinases are lost and signals are sent resulting in inappropriate growth. The current project studies two kinases, PDK1 and MEKK3, that function to control growth and differentiation pathways. We are trying to understand how these kinases operate and what might occur during cancer that causes these kinases to become deregulated. Once we know better how PDK1 and MEKK3 function, we will be able to design therapies that can specifically alter their involvement during cancer.",3 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=172149&lang=en
172152,Control of the function and activity of the anaphase promoting complex by phosphorylation,Rudner  Adam D,"Rudner, Adam D",University of Ottawa,Ontario,Canada,200809,300000.0,CIHR New Investigator,Salary Programs,Biomedical,Genetics,Anaphase-Promoting Complex; Cell Cycle Regulation; Phosphorylation; Proteomics; Ubiquitination; Yeast Cell Biology And Physiology,"The most critical moment in the life of a cell is when it separates its replicated chromosomes into two daughter cells.  Errors in the timing of this event can be catastrophic and lead to the damage and loss of chromosomes, both of which can lead to the generation of a cancerous cell.  A similar error in a maturing egg can lead to devastating chromosomal disorders, like Down syndrome. 
     How do cells integrate different signals, such as the size and environment of the cell, or if the cell's chromosomes are fully replicated and properly attached to the division machinery, to determine when to separate its chromosomes?  My hypothesis is that a complex of proteins, called the anaphase promoting complex or APC, keeps track of this information by the addition or removal of special marks, called phosphorylation, on members of this complex.  I want to determine how many different marks there are, how they change during the life of the cell and what happens when they are never added. 
Understanding how the APC keeps track of this information will lead to a greater understanding of why errors occur during chromosome separation and how we can prevent these errors from ever happening.",5 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=172152&lang=en
172158,The Iowa Flood Project: Effects of prenatal maternal stress on pregnancy outcomes and infant development.,King  Suzanne,"King, Suzanne",CIUSSS de l'Ouest-de-l'Ile-de-Montr&eacute;al-Douglas Hospital,Qu&eacute;bec,Canada,200809,1833269.0,Operating Grant,Operating Grants,Social / Cultural / Environmental / Population Health,"Human Development, Child and Youth Health",Fetal Development; Infant Development; Natural Disaster; Pregnancy Outcomes; Prenatal Stress; Questionnaires,"Stressing pregnant female animals result in damage to the foetus, subsequently affecting later development. Studying prenatal maternal stress (PNMS) in humans is hampered by ethical constraints: researchers cannot randomly assign pregnant women to stress and no-stress conditions. Disasters create natural experiments in which the degree of stress may be randomly assigned to large numbers of pregnant women. In January 1998, Southern Quebec experienced the worst disaster in Canadian history, an ice storm which knocked out electrical power to more than 3 million people for as long as 45 days. McGill researchers recruited over 150 pregnant women in June 1998 and have been following the women and the development of their children ever since. Results show that more severe in utero exposure to PNMS is associated with worse cognitive, behavioural, motor, and physical development during infancy and earlier childhood. Yet Project Ice Storm has weaknesses: there were no pre-disaster measures on the women, the sample size has diminished to about 140 families 10 years later, and no biological samples (i.e., fetal and maternal blood, placenta, umbilical cord), needed to test hypotheses about the way PNMS effects the foetus, were obtained. In June 2008, Iowa experienced the worst flooding in 50 years. Before the flooding, University of Iowa researchers had already recruited 135 pregnant women and assessed their psychological functioning, coping, and social support to study the effects of everyday stress on pregnancies. The goal of the current grant is to increase our understanding of the effects of PNMS on pregnancy and fetal outcomes, and on early childhood development. An additional 300 women will be recruited to participate. The current grant will allow us to test biological markers to determine the manner in which PNMS influences development. It will also allow for a thorough prospective follow-up of mothers and children annually between the ages of 1 and 5 years.",5 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=172158&lang=en
172162,The Impact of an Aging Population on the Delivery of Critical Care Services in Canada,Scales  Damon C,"Scales, Damon C","Sunnybrook Research Institute (Toronto, Ontario)",Ontario,Canada,200809,300000.0,CIHR New Investigator,Salary Programs,Health systems / services,Aging,Aging; Critical Care; Health Services And Policy Research; Intensive Care Units; Mechanical Ventilation,"We hypothesize that the aging of Canada's population is creating a looming crisis for our healthcare system.  Elderly patients already comprise the majority of acutely ill and critically ill patients in Canadian hospitals, and we anticipate that this issue will intensify.  We predict that Canada's aging population (the 'Baby Boomers') is expected to increase the demand for ICU care by nearly 60% over the next 20 years.  If successful, our research will examine the implications of these trends on the Canadian healthcare system.  By examining the effects of age on ICU utilization and outcome and on post-ICU healthcare utilization and outcome, we will provide vital information to help citizens, researchers, and policy makers anticipate future costs and resource requirements. We believe the findings of our research will be essential for planning healthcare delivery to the increasing number of elderly Canadian patients who will require ICU care in the future.",5 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=172162&lang=en
172168,Functional identification of genes required for cellular adaptive evolution during nutrient/metabolic stress.,Moffat  Jason,"Moffat, Jason",University of Toronto,Ontario,Canada,200809,300000.0,CIHR New Investigator,Salary Programs,Biomedical,Genetics,Biochemistry; Genetics; Growth Signaling; Lentivirus; Pancreatic Cancer; Rnai,"Cellular adaptive evolution is an integral component of development and disease progression. A molecular understanding of the genes that contribute to adaptive evolution during disease progression may lead to novel therapies or approaches to treatment. For example, identification of the mechanisms tumor cells use to adapt to and survive under nutritional stress may lead to novel anti-cancer therapies.

The overall goal of my research is to identify gene perturbations that confer adaptive growth advantages during tumorigenesis. I propose to use a genetic approach I helped develop combined with advanced image acquisition and analysis techniques to systematically identify genes that promote metabolic adaptive responses and confer tumor-like properties on 'normal' cells. My lab will study these genes in detail using in vitro assays and in vivo tumor xenograft models to understand the mechanism by which these genes promote tumorigenesis. My hope is that this approach will yield new therapeutic strategies and targets to combat cancer.",5 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=172168&lang=en
172175,Discovery and characterization of clinically important changes in axillary node-negative breast cancer.,Andrulis  Irene L,"Andrulis, Irene L",Mount Sinai Research Institute (Toronto),Ontario,Canada,200809,866726.0,Operating Grant,Operating Grants,Biomedical,Cancer Research,Axillary Node-Negative Breast Cancer; Biostatistical Methods Clustering; Gene Expression Micro Arrays; Micro-Dissection; Molecular Epidemiology; Pre-Malignant Breast Lesions; Prognostic Markers; Tumour Arrays,"Axillary lymph node status in breast cancer is the most important factor in predicting a patient's risk of recurrence of disease. Patients whose disease has not spread to the lymph nodes (axillary node-negative, ANN) generally have a good prognosis; however, 20-30% of ANN patients will experience disease recurrence. This limit in prognostic ability of lymph node status has led our team to a search for markers with prognostic power to aid in determining which ANN patients may benefit from therapy. 

We recruited women with ANN breast cancer from eight Toronto hospitals to participate in the study. We obtained biospecimens and clinical follow-up information from the group. We have found that certain genetic changes in the tumor, such as increased number of copies of the HER2 gene, can predict those patients most likely to have a recurrence.  We also found that the presence of lymphatic invasion is predictive of recurrence. We have identified novel patterns of genes that distinguish tumors with and without lymphatic invasion and related to recurrence. We will continue to investigate the alterations in breast tumors. We will evaluate how the patterns can be used to predict recurrence. We will study the genes to discover how changes in the genes can be involved in breast cancer.

Our studies may lead to the identification of novel genes involved in breast cancer. By studying tumors from a large number of women with ANN breast cancer we will be able to determine the clinical importance of the genetic changes. The protein products of some of these genes may be targets for the development of new cancer treatments, as Herceptin has been for tumors that overexpress HER2. Our goals are to explore the clinical importance of these genes to diagnose women early enough to prevent or diminish the effects of breast cancer, to tailor treatment to increase the likelihood of a cure, and to identify novel targets for new cancer therapeutics.",5 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=172175&lang=en
172176,Androgen Modulation of TGF-beta in Ovarian Cancer Cells,Brown  Theodore J,"Brown, Theodore J",Lunenfeld-Tanenbaum Research Institute  (Toronto),Ontario,Canada,200809,598992.0,Operating Grant,Operating Grants,Biomedical,Cancer Research,Androgen; Cell Culture; Invasion; Molecular Biology; Ovarian Cancer; Transforming Growth Factor Beta,"Epithelial ovarian cancer is associated with a high death rate, killing more than 17,000 women each year in North America.  A lack of means to detect the disease at early stages, coupled with the absence of clearly identifiable symptoms of disease onset results in the majority of cases being diagnosed at advanced stages.  Although improvements in chemotherapeutic treatment of this disease have occurred, the gains in life expectancy have been modest and the overall 5-year survival rate of advanced disease remains below 30%.  A better understanding of disease progression based upon identified risk factors will facilitate discovery of molecular markers of early disease/predisposition and of needed therapeutic targets to effectively manage recurrent, drug-resistant disease.  Androgen action has been implicated in ovarian cancer progression.  Studies from our laboratory have indicated that androgens alter the growth-inhibitory action of TGFbeta, a growth factor present in the ovary and elevated in ovarian cancer. However, TGFbeta also acts to promote cancer cell spread and invasion.  Our studies have identified a novel protein, Veph1, up-regulated by androgen treatment that interacts with members of the TGFbeta signaling pathway.  We have also found that VEPH1 is expressed at higher levels in more aggressive ovarian cancer cells.  Our preliminary data demonstrate that Veph1 blocks TGFbeta induced gene expression in a promoter-specific fashion.  Moreover, we have found that Veph1 interacts with Smurf1, a protein implicated in promoting a more invasive cell.   The proposed experiments will establish the role of VEPH on TGFbeta signaling in the context of ovarian cancer and will test whether it may mediate the impact of androgen in this disease.",4 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=172176&lang=en
172185,Molecular mechanisms of the sex differences in radiation responses,Kovalchuk  Olga,"Kovalchuk, Olga",University of Lethbridge (Alberta),Alberta,Canada,200809,698884.0,Operating Grant,Operating Grants,Biomedical,Gender and Health,Bystander Effect; Dna Methylation; Epigenetics; Ionizing Radiation; Sex Differences; Sex Hormones,"While modern cancer radiation therapy has increased patient survival rates, the risk of secondary treatment-related complications and adverse effects is becoming a growing clinical problem. Radiation-induced tumors and other toxic radiation effects have been reported to occur to a different extent in males and females. Mechanisms of these differences remain elusive. The DNA content of each cell in a given higher organism is identical: our liver and brain cells contain the same DNA, but they are very different in their shapes and functions. This is due to the existence of different patterns in reading and translation of genes for the type of cells in question, referred to as 'gene expression'. This is the domain of the emerging science of epigenetics  (literally, 'beyond genetics'). Remarkable features of epigenetic changes include simple chemical modifications of the 'C' base in DNA by attachment or removal of methyl (-CH3) groups. Highly methylated regions of DNA are turned off or silenced - a kind of cellular dimmer switch.  Most amazing and contrary to popular opinion that DNA sequences determine everything, epigenetic changes can extend beyond cell division to reproduction. Although epigenetic changes are inheritable, they are reversible. A lot still has to be learned about the role of epigenetic changes in living cells and organisms and their interactions with the environment. In my laboratory, we have found that males and females respond to radiation differently due to distinct epigenetic changes in DNA methylation. These changes may lead to different levels of radiation toxicity. Currently, we would like to understand (i) which epigenetic changes occur in males and females; (ii) why epigenetic changes in males and females are different; (iii) which cellular processes they affect. We will use a set of novel state-of-the art techniques to answer these questions.",5 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=172185&lang=en
172190,Delivery improvements for photodynamic therapy,Lilge  Lothar,"Lilge, Lothar",University Health Network (Toronto),Ontario,Canada,200809,451912.0,Operating Grant,Operating Grants,Biomedical,Cancer Research,Erythropoetin; Monte Carlo Simulation; Oncology; Optical Sensors; Tissue Response Models,"Photodynamic Therapy (PDT) attained approval for various oncological indications, but only for applications in the skin or other superficial tumours such as the bladder. Particular treatments of solid tissue volumes do not approach the clinically surgical precision to afford a survival advantage superior to surgery, so its minimal invasive nature has benefits over surgery and other oncological treatment modalities.
This failure of PDT to live up to its potential also in solid tumors is related to two separate but equally important reasons. The first is of physical nature and relates to the ability to shape the therapy to the tumour, whereas the second is of biological nature and relates to the intrinsic high sensitivity of various normal tissues to PDT despite a selective accumulation of the photosensitizer in the highly proliferating malignant tissue.
This proposal will further the potential of PDT for solid tissues by developing physics based strategies to improve conformal therapy and the use of a adjuvant pharmaceutical to reduce the sensitivity of normal tissues to PDT.
We made advances in shaping therapy planning using light diffusers with custom made emission profile. Here, we proposed to use numerical calculation and phantom measurements to first determine the optimum position of light fluence rate sensors to quantify the optical properties within the CTV and monitor them throughout PDT. As gains for regular shaped clinical target volumes, such as the prostate, will be limited we will orient ourselves additionally towards head and neck cancer, the possibly most difficult indications. 
Erythropoietin (EPO) and other neuroprotective agents are under investigation in stroke or trauma of brain. The EPO receptor (EPOR) is expressed in normal neuron and glial cells and commonly lacking in brain tumor. Hence, upregulation of EPOR in brain prior to PDT, followed by EPO administration prior and after PDT has potential to reduce sensitivity of normal brain.",4 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=172190&lang=en
172191,Regulation of cerebral blood flow in obstructive sleep apnea,Poulin  Marc J,"Poulin, Marc J",University of Calgary,Alberta,Canada,200809,238323.0,Operating Grant,Operating Grants,Biomedical,Circulatory and Respiratory Health,Cerebral Blood Flow; Endothelial Dysfunction; Hypoxia And Hypercapnia; Mechanisms; Nitric Oxide; Obstructive Sleep Apnea,"In healthy humans, brain blood flow is highly influenced by changes in the levels of oxygen and carbon dioxide in the circulating blood. However, the brain's important ability to regulate its blood flow is impaired in various disease processes such as obstructive sleep apnea (OSA).  People who have OSA stop breathing intermittently throughout the night, resulting in repeated episodes of low oxygen and high carbon dioxide in the blood.  Because of these repeated episodes, the ability of the brain vessels to regulate blood flow becomes impaired.  This impairment can lead to hypertension and stroke. The mechanisms that regulate brain blood flow in health, and how these mechanisms become impaired with disease, is poorly understood.  It is thought that nitric oxide (NO) plays a major role in regulating blood flow in several vascular beds, including the brain. In a first study, we will develop an experimental human model of intermittent hypoxia and we will determine the effects of intermittent hypoxia on the regulation of brain blood flow and the cardiovascular system. In a second study, we will determine the extent to which the brain blood flow response to low oxygen is altered in a broad range of patients with moderate to severe OSA. We will compare the responses in the brain with those in the forearm. Finally, our research will determine if the brain blood flow impairements observed in untreated OSA patients can be corrected after treatment with night-time continuous positive airway pressure.  This work may help us better understand conditions such as hypertension, OSA, stroke and aging, in which endothelium-dependent relaxation (i.e., relaxation of the cells that line brain blood vessels) by NO is impaired. Further, our research will provide useful information about how well treatment for OSA reverses brain blood flow impairments that may lead to stroke.  Ultimately, this will translate into improved health and disease prevention for Canadians.",3 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=172191&lang=en
172200,Segmental duplication and deletion of genes involved in optic nerve head development and function,Lehmann  Ordan J,"Lehmann, Ordan J",University of Alberta,Alberta,Canada,200809,693807.0,Operating Grant,Operating Grants,Biomedical,Genetics,Blindness; Genetics; Glaucoma; Phenotype; Transgenesis; Translational Research,"Until recently the contribution of chromosomal anomalies to human disease was under-appreciated. Although chromosomal duplications and deletions were known to occur, these were considered relatively rare (e.g. Down's syndrome). Advent of new approaches, primarily genetic arrays, have revealed that small chromosomal changes are exceedingly common - indeed they account for 12% or more of our genomes. This grant uses such small chromosomal anomalies as the starting point to study genes that are involved in eye development and disease. We will use array technology to identify genes that underlie cases of early-onset glaucoma and characterize these genes to determine their role in commoner late-onset disease. In parallel, we will characterize the function of a new gene, where we have considerable evidence that it has an important role in retinal development, and due to its location within glaucoma-associated chromosomal anomalies, may contribute to glaucoma. Taken together, these studies will improve understanding of the disease processes that lead to glaucoma, with considerable opportunities to translate this information into improved patient management.",4 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=172200&lang=en
172201,"Role of placental VEGF-A and FLT1/sFLT1 in placental vascularity, fetal growth, and maternal function in mice",Adamson  S. Lee,"Adamson, S. Lee",Sinai Health System (Toronto),Ontario,Canada,200809,1028010.0,Operating Grant,Operating Grants,Biomedical,"Human Development, Child and Youth Health",Angiogenesis; Mouse Models; Placenta; Preeclampsia; Pregnancy; Vegf-A,"The placenta is a critically important organ for successful pregnancy.  In the placenta, maternal blood rich in oxygen and nutrients bathes the fetal villi.  They absorb these substances and they are transported to the fetus in the umbilical cord to support fetal growth.  The villi are packed full of fetal blood vessels in a healthy placenta, but blood vessels may be sparce in fetuses whose growth is abnormally slow during pregnancy.  Similarly, the flow of blood from the maternal side is often low in women with preeclampsia, a life-threatening disorder in the mother.  In women with small fetuses or who have preeclampsia the normal increase in sflt1, a factor that inhibits blood vessel growth, is accelerated.  Evidence suggests high sflt1 inhibits blood vessel growth and can cause these diseases.  Treatments to block the rise in sflt1 are contemplated, yet the normal function of the late-pregnancy rise is unknown.  The current proposal investigates the normal role for sflt1 in placental blood vessel density and maternal function in mutant mice.  Since evidence suggests sflt1 is produced by the fetal trophoblast cells that form the placenta, we will use mutant mice to specifically delete sflt1 in these cells.  We anticipate that this will blunt the normal increase in sflt1 in late gestation in the mother.  We will then examine the effect of this intervention on the placenta and the mother.  sflt1 is believed to act by reducing levels of the blood vessel growth factor, VEGF.  So, we will see if inhibiting VEGF production by trophoblast cells using other types of mutant mice reduces placental vessel density and/or causes preeclamptic changes in the mother.  These studies will help us understand the role of sflt1 and VEGF in normal pregnancy leading to a better understanding of how abnormal levels of these substances cause disease in pregnancy.",5 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=172201&lang=en
172205,Investigating the Genetic Complexity of Bardet-Biedl syndrome (BBS) using the C. elegans Animal Model,Zhen  Mei,"Zhen, Mei; Héon, Elise",Lunenfeld-Tanenbaum Research Institute  (Toronto),Ontario,Canada,200809,695380.0,Operating Grant,Operating Grants,Biomedical,Genetics,Bardet-Biedl Syndrome; C. Elegans; Ciliopathy; Cilium; Modifiers,"Bardet-Biedl syndrome (BBS) is an inherited form of progressive blindness that is associated with other major health problems.   These include obesity, kidney and liver failure, diabetes and learning disability, among other features of variable degrees of severity. Mutations (changes in the genetic code) in twelve genes have been found to be associated with this condition. These genes appear to play a role in either the maintenance or function of the cilium, a cellular structure that extends from the membrane of the cell, and regulates various functions of different cell types.  The sequence content of eight of these genes is similar across that of different animal species including the worm Caenorhabiditis elegans (C. elegans).
C. elegans is a powerful genetic tool to explore the molecular basis of cilium development and its function. We have begun establishing C. elegans as a model to explore the molecular basis of the variability behind the observable characteristics (phenotypes) of the BBS disorder. We have defined BBS-specific phenotypes (observable characteristics) in C elegans and will use these to identify genes that can influence disease severity (modifiers). Our current studies demonstrate the feasibility of exploring the genetic complexity of human BBS genes using the C. elegans model. Excitingly, we cloned our first modifier of C. elegans bbs mutants and we are assessing its effect in worms and in humans. Using this model we will not only better understand the biological impact of BBS-related mutations present in human patients, but also tease out different levels of genetic components that may influence the severity of the BBS disease.",4 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=172205&lang=en
172213,Regulation of Transforming Growth Factor-ß Signaling and Responses,Bonni  Shirin,"Bonni, Shirin",University of Calgary,Alberta,Canada,200809,474746.0,Operating Grant,Operating Grants,Biomedical,Cancer Research,Cancer; Cell Cycle Progression; Cell Proliferation; Chromatin Immunoprecipitation Assays; Chromatin Remodeling; Epithelial-To-Mesenchymal Transition,"Controlled cell division, or proliferation, is essential for normal growth and function of the developing and adult organisms.  Importantly, unchecked cell proliferation may cause increased number of cells, or tumors, that can turn into cancer. Controlling cell proliferation requires that cells communicate with each other by secreting different types of growth factors into the external side of these cells.  Some of these growth factors instruct cells to proliferate, while others stop cells form dividing. The TGF-ßs are members of a family of secreted growth factors that prevent many normal cell types from proliferating.   However, cells may change to become resistant to anti-proliferative effect of TGFß. This change can potentially start small tumors.  At later stages of tumor development, TGF-ß can produce other effects on these cells, such as changes in cell shape and promotion of cell movement. These TGFß-effects may help the tumors to be metastatic because cancer cells can spread into the blood stream.  Once blood bourn cancer cells can spread into other parts of the body. In general, cancer may arise from either an increase in the amount or activity of cellular factors that promote cell proliferation and enhance the ability of cells to migrate.  These cellular factors are referred to as proto-oncogenes.  Tumors can also result from a decrease in the amount or function of cellular factors that prevent cell proliferation and resist cell movement.  These types of factors are called tumor suppressors. The overall goal of this research proposal is to understand which and how changes in proto-oncogenes or tumor suppressors affect the ability of cells to respond to TGF-ß. This work will increase our understanding of the causes of cancer and may lead to new therapeutic advances to combat this devastating disease.",4 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=172213&lang=en
172214,Pre-clinical trial of docosahexaenoic acid supplementation in AMD,Sauve  Yves,"Sauve, Yves",University of Alberta,Alberta,Canada,200809,755729.0,Operating Grant,Operating Grants,Clinical,Aging,Age Related Macular Degeneration (Amd); Electrophysiology; Mechanisms Of Retina Degeneration And Dha Therapeutic Action; Mouse Model; Nutrition; Visual Function,"Age-related macular degeneration (AMD) is the leading cause of registered blindness in the elderly of the western world. Each year, 78,000 Canadians are diagnosed with AMD, a number expected to triple within the next 25 year as our population ages. The dry form of AMD comprises over 90% of all cases and a cure as yet to be found for it. A major hurdle for developing a treatment has been the lack of optimal animal models of AMD. The newly developed ELOVL4 transgenic mouse shares similar pathological processes to dry AMD. During the past 2 years of funding by CIHR we have undertaken a detailed analysis of this novel model, which further supports anatomical and functional similarities in the degenerating retinas of ELOVL4 mice and humans with dry AMD. We also have obtained conclusive preliminary results supporting that retina function can be partially preserved by dietary supplementation with DHA (a type of omega-3 fatty acid) in ELOVL4 mice. More exhaustive experiments are required to better understand the mechanisms underlying retina degeneration and the therapeutic effect of DHA in ELOVL4 mice. These experiments must be undertaken before we can consider and optimally plan a large-scale clinical trial of DHA supplementation in dry AMD patients. Since dry AMD is the greatest risk factor for developing wet AMD, then preventing dry AMD is likely to thwart most cases of wet AMD.",5 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=172214&lang=en
172226,Effects of Regular Exercise on Cerebrovascular Reserve in Older Adults: Role in the Prevention of Age-Related Cognitive Decline,Poulin  Marc J,"Poulin, Marc J",University of Calgary,Alberta,Canada,200809,659200.0,Operating Grant,Operating Grants,Biomedical,Aging,Aerobic Exercise Training; Aging; Cardiorespiratory Fitness; Cerebral Blood Flow; Cognitive Function; Stroke Prevention,"Cerebral blood flow (CBF) is highly regulated by carbon dioxide and oxygen in the arterial blood. This process becomes impaired with cerebrovascular disease processes and by aging.  Aging is associated with a progressive decline in CBF, which is a major risk factor for stroke. In premenopausal women, this decline is not as pronounced as in men but it appears to be accelerated after menopause and persists into old age. This biphasic phenomenon might be explained by ovarian hormone modulation of CBF before menopause, followed by a predominant influence of other factors thereafter. Physical inactivity, a modifiable risk factor for stroke and cognitive decline, may be one of those factors. However, the mechanism by which physical activity exerts its protective effect on the cerebral circulation is unclear. 

If physical activity is a significant modulator of CBF, one would predict that men and women who are more active would have fewer incidences of cerebrovascular disease than those who are sedentary. A suitable experimental design would require a set of studies in sedentary men and women, followed by the same studies in active men and women, and then placing the sedentary and physically-active groups on similar training programs. This approach would enable the possibility of using this knowledge to impact predictors for stroke, or at least how active living may prevent cardiovascular problems in the brain from occurring. 

We propose studies in sedentary men and women to address the question: What are the effects of physical activity on CBF and cognitive function in older men and women? This approach will allow us to study the interactions between the cerebral circulation and cognitive function, and may provide powerful diagnostic tools to help identify those individuals at risk of stroke. This work may have a positive impact in helping delay or prevent the onset of disabilities due to diseases like stroke.",5 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=172226&lang=en
172231,Design and Application of Combinatorial Libraries of Synthetic Antibodies and Alternative Scaffolds,Sidhu  Sachdev S,"Sidhu, Sachdev S",University of Toronto,Ontario,Canada,200809,941193.0,Operating Grant,Operating Grants,Biomedical,Genetics,Antibodies; Cancer; Cell Signaling; Phage Display; Protein Engineering; Protein-Protein Interactions,"Protein-protein interactions are involved in essentially all biological processes.  Furthermore, most diseases are caused by or are associated with aberrant protein-protein interactions.  Thus, understanding and manipulating protein-protein interactions holds great potential for enhancing our understanding of how cells work, and also, for developing therapies for devastating diseases such as cancer and infectious disease.  This project will develop synthetic antibody libraries as a source of ligands to selectively target proteins inside cells.  These antibodies will be invaluable tools for probing cell function and could even be used as therapies for unmet medical needs.",5 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=172231&lang=en
172242,Impact of HLA-driven immune escape on HIV replicative capacity,Brumme  Zabrina,"Brumme, Zabrina","Simon Fraser University (Burnaby, B.C.)",British Columbia,Canada,200809,300000.0,CIHR New Investigator,Salary Programs,Biomedical,Infection and Immunity,Cytotoxic T-Lymphocytes (Ctl); Hiv Evolution And Diversity; Hiv/Aids; Human Leukocyte Antigen (Hla); Immune Escape; Viral Fitness,"With over 30 million people living with HIV/AIDS globally, the need for an HIV vaccine has never been so urgent.  Yet the recent failure of a major phase 2b vaccine trial highlights the sobering reality that 25 years after the discovery of HIV, we are nowhere close to a vaccine.  In response to major knowledge gaps in our understanding of HIV immunobiology, experts are now calling for a major paradigm shift ""back to the basics of vaccine research"".  One of the major challenges is the virus' extreme mutational capacity, which allows the virus to escape recognition by the immune system.  Understanding how HIV adapts to immune responses will help us design better vaccines.  

Specialized immune cells called ""killer"" T-cells eliminate HIV-infected cells by recognizing small viral fragments presented by Human Leukocyte Antigen (HLA) molecules on the infected cell surface. Possession of certain HLA molecules is associated with slower rates of HIV disease progression, although the reasons behind this are not well understood.  It has been hypothesized that certain ""protective"" HLA molecules mediate a particularly strong and effective immune response that selects for escape mutations that compromise the virus' ability to replicate. The resulting ""disabled"" virus yields a more benign disease course.   If substantiated, this hypothesis could have important implications for vaccine design. 

This proposal represents the first large-scale study investigating the impact of immune escape mutations on viral replicative capacity in HIV sequences obtained from infected patients.  The identification of specific escape mutations that influence HIV replication capacity (and the HLA molecules that drive these changes) will help illuminate which parts of the virus would be most important to include in future vaccine strategies.",5 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=172242&lang=en
172255,Chromosome Y-dependent modulation of the effects of androgen receptors on mouse cardiac cells,Deschepper  Christian F,"Deschepper, Christian F",Institut de recherches cliniques de Montr&eacute;al,Qu&eacute;bec,Canada,200809,784445.0,Operating Grant,Operating Grants,Biomedical,Circulatory and Respiratory Health,Androgen Receptors; Cardiac Function; Chromosome Y; Early Life Programming; Genetics And Genomics; Sex Difference,"Sex differentiation, in addition to being responsible for the obvious differences between males and females, also has consequences on general health.  In particular, cardiovascular diseases affect women and men differently.  In addition to sex steroids (mostly estrogens in females and testosterone in males), there is now evidence that genes present on sex chromosomes (including the male-specific chromosome Y) also play critical roles. However, little is known about the functions of chromosome Y genes besides their effects on male reproductive organs, and there is almost no information explaining how they might affect cardiovascular health.  We have obtained evidence that genetic variants of chromosome Y are responsible for differences in the size and contractile properties of cardiac cells from different mouse strains.  Preliminary experiments have revealed that these effects are complex, as chromosome Y variants transform the manner in which several cardiac genes respond to testosterone, in part by programming around the time of birth how cardiac cells will respond to testosterone later during adult life.  We have therefore designed experiments aimed at elucidating how chromosome Y could affect the characteristics of cardiac cells and their responsiveness to testosterone, and identify the mechanisms responsible for these effects.",5 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=172255&lang=en
172256,New concept of hypoxic pulmonary vasoconstriction: Conducted response via connexin 40,Kuebler  Wolfgang M,"Kuebler, Wolfgang M",Unity Health Toronto,Ontario,Canada,200809,333308.0,Operating Grant,Operating Grants,Biomedical,Circulatory and Respiratory Health,Conducted Response; Endothelial Cells; Endotoxemia; Gap Junctions; Hypoxic Pulmonary Vasoconstriction; Intravital Microscopy,"In the lung, blood vessels react to hypoxia with a rapid and sustained contraction termed hypoxic pulmonary vasoconstriction (HPV). HPV redistributes blood flow from areas which are poorly aerated to intact lung regions with better ventilation. In this way, sufficient blood oxygenation is maintained even when 50% of lung tissue no longer contribute to gas exchange.
Lung inflammation or sepsis, but also commonly used anesthetics attenuate HPV and may thus impair blood oxygenation. A perpetuated HPV may also be detrimental in generalized hypoxia e.g. at high altitude, since contraction of all resistance vessels will increase blood pressure in the lung and ultimately cause lung edema and/or right heart failure.
Despite its relevance, the involved signaling mechanisms and the exact sites of oxygen sensing and vasoconstriction are incompletely understood. We have established innovative imaging methods which allow for the direct visualization of blood vessels and blood oxygenation in the intact lung. We can show that the primary site of gas exchange is at the level of the smallest blood vessels, the capillaries, while vasoconstriction is confined to upstream arterioles. We thus postulate a signal conduction mechanism which must propagate the hypoxic signal from the capillaries to the arterioles and suggest a critical role for the molecule connexin 40 (Cx40) which facilitates rapid signal conduction by electric coupling of adjoining cells. Our proposed experiments aim to (i) characterize the role of Cx40 in HPV, (ii) identify the cellular mechanisms which underlie the signal conduction from capillaries to arterioles, and (iii) test the relevance of this concept for clinical conditions in which HPV is impaired or perpetuated. The results of this project will change our understanding of one of the basic mechanisms of vascular regulation, and will provide the basis for new therapeutic strategies in the treatment of diseases in which lung vascular tone is dysregulated.",3 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=172256&lang=en
172260,Regulation of nitric oxide and its effects:  A pivotal point of control of mast cell phenotype and function.,Befus  Dean,"Befus, Dean",University of Alberta,Alberta,Canada,200809,699375.0,Operating Grant,Operating Grants,Biomedical,Infection and Immunity,Aldolase A; Allergy; Asthma; B Bisphosphate; Bioenergetics; Epigenetics; Fructose 1; Inflammation; Influenza; Innate Immunity; Interferon Gamma; Mast Cells; Nitration; Nitric Oxide; Nitric Oxide Synthases; Post-Translational Modifications,"Mast cells are involved in allergy and other inflammatory diseases. These cells store and rapidly secrete several powerful chemicals that cause the symptoms of allergic reactions.  In recent years it has also been discovered that mast cells help defend us against bacterial and viral infections.  Our goal is to understand how mast cell functions are controlled so that we will be able to prevent or inhibit the unwanted symptoms of allergy, but at the same time enhance the benefits that mast cells bring in our defence against infections.  

We were one of the first research groups to discover that mast cells make nitric oxide, the gas that was the subject of the Nobel Prize in Medicine in 1998.  Nitric oxide produced by mast cells inhibits their allergic reactions and appears to enhance their role in host defence.  We are studying precisely how this works and the factors that control how and when mast cells make nitric oxide to regulate their functions.  Our research is aimed at identification of new drugs or therapeutic targets for allergic and infectious diseases.",5 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=172260&lang=en
172268,Cerebral small vessel disease and beta-amyloid deposition in subjects with mildly impaired cognition,Smith  Eric E,"Smith, Eric E",University of Calgary,Alberta,Canada,200809,300000.0,CIHR New Investigator,Salary Programs,Clinical,Aging,Alzheimer'S Disease; Cerebrovascular Disease; Cognition; Leukoaraiosis; Mri; Pet,"More than one-quarter of people over age 65 will develop memory problems that impair their basic activities of life. The overall goal of our project is to understand the relationship between memory and brain blood flow, brain damage from lack of blood flow, and Alzheimer's disease. The knowledge gained from this study will allow us to tell who is most at risk for memory difficulty related to blood flow problems or related to Alzheimer's disease. Our results will help us to identify the right groups for future studies of treatments to prevent memory loss.",5 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=172268&lang=en
172270,Function of the Gab1 and Gab2 scaffolding adapter proteins in angiogenesis,Royal  Isabelle D,"Royal, Isabelle D",Centre hospitalier de l'Universit&eacute; de Montr&eacute;al (CHUM),Qu&eacute;bec,Canada,200809,643065.0,Operating Grant,Operating Grants,Biomedical,Cancer Research,Angiogenesis; Cancer; Endothelial Cell; Gab1/2; Knockout Mice; Signal Transduction,"Much progress has been made over the last decade in our understanding of the cellular mechanisms leading to cancer. In spite of this, cancer still remains a major cause of human death. A novel anticancer therapy, based on the destruction of blood vessels within tumors, however offers new hope for the successful treatment of cancer. It is derived from the principle that tumor cells, like healthy cells, require oxygen and nutrients to survive. Thus, tumor cells release factors to act on nearby blood vessels to stimulate their growth into the developing tumor. This formation of new blood vessels, a process called angiogenesis, is essential for the aggressive growth of tumor cells, and allows their dispersal in the organism and the formation of metastases. To develop effective means of blocking the growth of tumor-associated blood vessels, we need to understand the molecular events that underlie their formation. In this context, we are proposing to deepen our understanding of the molecular mechanisms regulating angiogenesis with special emphasis on proteins called Gab1 and Gab2, which represent important signal amplifiers in cells. We have shown over the last funding period that these proteins play essential roles in the formation of blood vessels in vitro. Therefore, our goal for the next five years is to investigate their in vivo role during angiogenesis and tumor progression, and determine their potential as new therapeutic targets. To do this, we will generate mice in which the Gab1 and Gab2 genes are deleted from blood vessel cells, and we will investigate the consequences on angiogenesis, tumor-associated angiogenesis, and the ability of tumor cells to grow and metastasize. In a complementary fashion, we will also develop and test small peptide inhibitors that neutralize Gab1 and Gab2. The potential impact of these studies on the burden of cancer is that the knowledge generated may lead to the development of novel strategies to block angiogenesis and tumor growth.",5 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=172270&lang=en
172278,Vitamin D agonists/histone deacetylase inhibitor hybrids as potential therapeutics.,White  John H,"White, John H; Gleason, James L",McGill University,Qu&eacute;bec,Canada,200809,352761.0,Operating Grant,Operating Grants,Biomedical,Cancer Research,Cancer Therapeutics; Histone Deacetylase Inhibitors; Hybrid Compounds; Medicinal Chemistry; Vitamin D,"The hormonal form of vitamin D, 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D3 (1,25D) binds to the vitamin D receptor (VDR) and is a key regulator of calcium homeostasis. However, data from multiple sources, including one of the applicants (White), showed that 1,25D is a potent regulator of cell proliferation and differentiation, and has anticancer properties. Moreover, it is also a regulator of immune system function. Vitamin D insufficiency has been linked to elevated rates of various cancers, as well as autoimmune and infectious diseases. Therapeutic potential of 1,25D is limited by its tendency to raise calcium concentrations in blood (hypercalcemia). Moreover, cancer progression is associated with acquired resistance to 1,25D. However, resistance can be overcome in vitro by coadministration of the histone deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitor trichostatin A (TSA). HDAC inhibitors (HDACi) have emerged as a new class of therapeutic agents for treatment of cancer and other indications. However, a drawback of current HDACi's is their lack of specificity; e.g. HDACi's TSA and SAHA inhibit all 12 class I and II HDACs. We observed a synergistic effect of TSA and 1,25D on proliferation of 1,25D-resistant squamous carcinoma cells, and others demonstrated a combinatory effect in prostate and breast cancer. 
Based on these findings we designed a series of molecular hybrids that combine VDR agonism with HDAC inhibition incorporated into the molecules' side chains. Bifunctional compounds represent a powerful alternative to combination therapy. The best characterized hybrid, triciferol, combines VDR agonism with HDAC inhibition at nM concentrations, and, importantly, does not induce hypercalcemia. It was also more efficacious than 1,25D in in vitro cancer models. Unlike TSA or SAHA, the hybrids exhibit a range of HDAC specificities. To enhance the commercial potential of our hybrids, we must (i) define their HDAC specificity, and (ii) provide evidence of efficacy in vivo.",3 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=172278&lang=en
172284,Impact of HLA-driven immune escape on HIV replicative capacity,Brumme  Zabrina,"Brumme, Zabrina","Simon Fraser University (Burnaby, B.C.)",British Columbia,Canada,200809,354693.0,Operating Grant,Operating Grants,Biomedical,Infection and Immunity,Cytotoxic T-Lymphocytes (Ctl); Hiv Evolution; Hiv/Aids; Human Leukocyte Antigen (Hla); Immune Escape; Viral Fitness,"With over 30 million people living with HIV/AIDS globally, the need for an HIV vaccine has never been so urgent.  Yet the recent failure of a major phase 2b vaccine trial highlights the sobering reality that 25 years after the discovery of HIV, we are nowhere close to a vaccine.  In response to major knowledge gaps in our understanding of HIV immunobiology, experts are now calling for a major paradigm shift ""back to the basics of vaccine research"".  One of the major challenges is the virus' extreme mutational capacity, which allows the virus to escape recognition by the immune system.  Understanding how HIV adapts to immune responses will help us design better vaccines.  

Specialized immune cells called ""killer"" T-cells eliminate HIV-infected cells by recognizing small viral fragments presented by Human Leukocyte Antigen (HLA) molecules on the infected cell surface. Possession of certain HLA molecules is associated with slower rates of HIV disease progression, although the reasons behind this are not well understood.  It has been hypothesized that certain ""protective"" HLA molecules mediate a particularly strong and effective immune response that selects for escape mutations that compromise the virus' ability to replicate. The resulting ""disabled"" virus yields a more benign disease course.   If substantiated, this hypothesis could have important implications for vaccine design. 

This proposal represents the first large-scale study investigating the impact of immune escape mutations on viral replicative capacity in HIV sequences obtained from infected patients.  The identification of specific escape mutations that influence HIV replication capacity (and the HLA molecules that drive these changes) will help illuminate which parts of the virus would be most important to include in future vaccine strategies.",3 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=172284&lang=en
172289,Development of Clincial Standards of Care for Huntington Disease Intermediate Allele Predictive Test Results,Hayden  Michael R,"Hayden, Michael R",BC Children's Hospital Research Institute,British Columbia,Canada,200809,305804.0,Operating Grant,Operating Grants,Clinical,Health Services and Policy Research,Huntington Disease; Intermediate Alleles; Predictive Testing; Prevalence; Psychosocial Issues; Risk Estimates,"Predictive testing for Huntington disease (HD) has been available since 1986.  This genetic test has the ability to predict whether an individual will develop HD in their lifetime and thus, have the ability to pass the disease onto their children.  Some individuals who undergo predictive testing receive an unusual test result which differs from a positive or negative result.  This result is called an intermediate allele(IA). Individuals with an IA will never develop HD but there remains a risk that their children or grandchildren could develop the disease.  

In the literature there remains many gaps in knowledge regarding IAs for HD. In particular, the current International Predictive Testing Guidelines do not address the possibility of this result, nor are the complexities surrounding this result acknowledged.  This study will not only address these gaps, but will inform the development of clinical standards of care for communicating IA results during predictive testing.  

The specific objectives of this study are to determine the prevalence of IAs in a North American general population; determine quantified risk estimates for the likelihood than an individual with an IA will have a child who will develop the disease; and lastly, describe the psychological and social implications and impact of receiving an IA result.  

This study will represent the largest empirical study on HD IAs to date. Collectively, the three objectives of this unique, multidisciplinary study will provide the foundation on which to base the development of clinical standards and practice recommendations for IA predictive test results.  These standards will help ensure that this subset of patients receive appropriate information, support, education, and counselling throughout their predictive testing process.",3 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=172289&lang=en
172299,Novel factors that mediate methicillin resistance in S. aureus,Golemi-Kotra  Dasantila,"Golemi-Kotra, Dasantila","York University (Toronto, Ontario)",Ontario,Canada,200809,332463.0,Operating Grant,Operating Grants,Biomedical,Infection and Immunity,Antibiotic Resistance; Enzymology; Molecular Biology; Protein-Dna Interactions; Regulatory Mechanisms; Staphylococcus Aureus,"Staphylococcus aureus is one of the leading causes of hospital-and community-acquired infections. This microorganism has
a remarkable ability to rapidly adapt to antibiotic pressure and acquire resistance. Extensive use of beta-lactam antibiotics
has invariably been followed by the development and spread of resistance in S. aureus. Methicillin, a beta-lactam antibiotic
designed to circumvent beta-lactam-resistant S. aureus, encountered resistant strains soon after its introduction into clinics.
Methicillin-resistant S. aureus (MRSA) strains pose a serious threat to public health as they have become resistant to almost
all the clinically used antibiotics. Emergence of intermediate-vancomycin-resistant S. aureus strains has limited the options
for treatment of MRSA infections. Given the recent development of this microorganism and the impact it has on human
health we are undertaking research aimed at understanding the molecular mechanism of antibiotic resistance. In particular,
we are interested in investigating the S. aureus response to antibiotics that inhibit cell wall peptidoglycan biosynthesis.
Peptidoglycan is the main component of cell wall. It provides shape and mechanic strength to the cell wall, and it is unique to
bacteria. Therefore, it is an important target for drug development. Studies have shown that many genes in S. aureus are
regulated in response to cell wall damage caused by cell wall inhibitors. Elucidation of the roles these genes play in the S.
aureus response to cell damage will have a great impact in the design of new strategies in treatment of Staphylococcal
infections.",3 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=172299&lang=en
172304,Safety and Effectiveness of Sitagliptin in Patients with Type 2 Diabetes,Eurich  Dean,"Eurich, Dean",University of Alberta,Alberta,Canada,200809,300000.0,CIHR New Investigator,Salary Programs,Health systems / services,Health Services and Policy Research,Diabetes; Health Outcomes; Morbidity & Mortality; Pharmacoepidemiology; Restrospective Cohort; Safety,"Treatment of type 2 diabetes often requires the use of several oral drugs. Overall, these drugs help to lower blood sugars levels and reduce the risk of kidney, eye, and nerve damage. Differences appear to exist, however, with respect to the effect of each drug's on the risk of cardiovascular disease (i.e., heart and stroke disease). For example, previous research has suggested that metformin may reduce the risk of cardiovascular disease, while newer agents such as the thiazolidinediones may in fact increase the risk. Given the wide spread use of newer drugs in the treatment of diabetes, better evaluation of the cardiovascular effects of these agents is required. 

The range of drugs available to treat diabetes in Canada has recently expanded with the approval of a new oral antidiabetic drug - sitagliptin.  These drugs are rapidly being used to control blood sugars in patients with diabetes, yet there effects on heart disease and stroke are not known. 

This study will measure the risk of heart disease and stroke in people using sitagliptin relative to other drugs, like metformin or glyburide. Information from this study will help clinicians better determine which combination of drugs is safe and effective for the treatment of type 2 diabetes.",5 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=172304&lang=en
172316,Behavioural dysfunction and map alterations in epilepsy.,Teskey  G. Cam C,"Teskey, G. Cam C",University of Calgary,Alberta,Canada,200809,622360.0,Operating Grant,Operating Grants,Biomedical,"Neurosciences, Mental Health and Addiction",Modeling Brain Reorganization In Epilepsy,"Epilepsy is the most common and expensive neurological disorder worldwide.  Between seizures people with epilepsy may have any number of behavioural comorbidities that include anxiety/depression, memory disruption, sexual dysfunction, sensory and motor disturbances.  My laboratory has documented motor disturbances in rats that had seizures elicited from the area in the neocortex that regulates forelimb movement.  Furthermore, neocortical movement representations or ""motor maps"" become larger in rats with seizures much like the anomalous motor maps reported in people with frontal lobe epilepsy.  Thus, we have developed a homologous rat model for the altered motor behaviour and motor map reorganization observed in a population of people with frontal lobe epilepsy.
The framework for this grant application is that alterations in neural network functioning underlies inter-ictal behavioural comorbidities with epilepsy.  Neural network functioning can be assessed by deriving high resolution motor maps.  The motor maps are in turn based on the interplay between excitatory and inhibitory cells and seizures alter the synaptic communication and/or cellular firing properties of the cells in the neocortical circuits.  Through the studies proposed here we will test the general hypothesis that expansion and reorganization of neural networks, manifested as changes in motor maps, will be related to alterations in motor behaviours in rats. 
This grant utilizes a multi-level integrated approach that encompasses the behavioural, network, cellular and synaptic levels.  The novelty and innovative aspects of these studies are based upon the fact that my laboratory is the only one that uses detailed kinematic behavioural analysis and high resolution intracortical microstimulation to derive motor maps following induced seizures.  Thus my laboratory is in a unique position to discover the relationship between functional network level organization and skilled motor behaviour after seizures.",5 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=172316&lang=en
172320,Effects of oviductal secretion on sperm function,Kan  Frederick W,"Kan, Frederick W","Queen's University (Kingston, Ontario)",Ontario,Canada,200809,486824.0,Operating Grant,Operating Grants,Biomedical,Gender and Health,Fallopian Tube Secretion; Fertility And Infertility; Oviduct-Specific Glycoprotein; Recombinant Human Oviductin; Sperm-Egg Interaction,"In Canada about one in eight couples suffer from some form of infertility. Data obtained over the past twenty years revealed that approximately 30% of cases of infertility are found in the man alone, and another 20% involve abnormality found in both man and woman. Taken together, the male factor is at least partly responsible in about 50% of infertile couples. To date, reliable clinical assays for sperm fertilizing ability are not available mainly due to ethical restrictions in obtaining human eggs for this purpose. Without this information, infertile male patients, including those with mild male factors, tend to choose intracytoplasmic sperm injection (ICSI) as an assisted reproductive technology (ART) procedure to achieve fertilization in vitro. Despite the relatively high fertilization rate of ICSI, reports on the association of increased birth defects in ICSI concepti have begun to surface. This may due partly to damages to gamete chromosomes caused by the invasive and unnatural ICSI procedures. To encourage the use of standard in vitro fertilization (IVF) and intrauterine insemination (IUI), the less invasive ART procedures, for male infertility treatment, there is a need to improve fertilization of human gametes by increasing the fertilization rate of standard IVF and IUI. One possible approach is to treat sperm with oviductin, a protein secreted by the Fallopian tube which has been implicated in enhancing the fertilizing ability of sperm. The main objective of the present proposal is to define sperm quality and fertilizing competence for proper and ethical use of ART in alleviating male infertility utilizing human oviductin. To achieve this goal, a series of interrelated experiments have been designed to produce large amounts of human oviductin from an immortalize cell line  originated from the Fallopian tube. The ultimate goal is to improve the fertilziation rate of the less invasive standard IVF and IUI procedures involving couples with male infertility.",4 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=172320&lang=en
172327,Mechanism of miRNA action in translation and mRNA decay.,Sonenberg  Nahum,"Sonenberg, Nahum",McGill University,Qu&eacute;bec,Canada,200809,784635.0,Operating Grant,Operating Grants,Biomedical,Genetics,Cancer; In Vitro Microrna Asays; In Vitro Transcription; Microrna; Rna Metabolism; Translational Control,"A newly discovered class of small RNA molecule, called microRNAs, has recently been shown to be involved in muscle differentiation, stem cell development, and cancer formation.  MicroRNAs bind to certain tails of the genetic material (messenger RNA) that serves as a the template for the synthesis of all proteins in the cell.  We are studying how microRNAs, once bound to messenger RNAs, shut down protein synthesis and lead to messenger RNA degradation.  Understanding the basic mechanisms of how miRNAs function will allow us to design new treatments for a variety of microRNA-related diseases",5 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=172327&lang=en
172332,"Prescribing Quality in Long-Term Care Homes: Correlation Between Indicators of Overuse, Underuse and Misuse",Bronskill  Susan E,"Bronskill, Susan E",Institute for Clinical Evaluative Sciences-Toronto,Ontario,Canada,200809,187794.0,Operating Grant,Operating Grants,Health systems / services,Health Services and Policy Research,Applied Statistics; Drug Utilization; Health Services Research; Long-Term Care Homes; Provider Profiling; Quality Of Care,"The correct use of drug therapies in residents of long-term care homes (also known as nursing homes) is a challenge. These individuals are frail, have many clinical conditions which require multiple medications, and are treated by a number of different doctors, nurses and aides. All of these factors place nursing home residents at special risk for developing problems related to their drug treatments. This study will compare the prescribing patterns for different kinds of drugs across nursing homes in order to see if facilities with good (or bad) prescribing practices can be identified consistently. The results will be used to determine which drugs should be included in reports to the public on the quality of nursing homes.",3 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=172332&lang=en
172333,Vasoactive peptide and growth factor-induced signaling in vascular smooth muscle cells in health and disease,Srivastava  Ashok K,"Srivastava, Ashok K",Centre hospitalier de l'Universit&eacute; de Montr&eacute;al (CHUM),Qu&eacute;bec,Canada,200809,643660.0,Operating Grant,Operating Grants,Biomedical,Circulatory and Respiratory Health,Angiotensin -Ii; Calcium; Calmodulin; Endothelin; Growth Factors; Hypertension,"Hypertension is associated with abnormal vascular resistance due to vessel wall thickness.  The increase in wall thickness of the vessels is due to a greater vascular smooth muscle cell (VSMC) mass, because of the abnormal growth and proliferation of these cells.  The exact mechanism for this abnormality in hypertension is not clearly understood at the present.  The studies proposed in this grant application are aimed at delineating the molecular mechanism of the abnormal VSMC growth in animal models of hypertension. More specifically,we propose to investigate if vasoactive peptide and growth factor -induced proliferative and hypertrophic signaling pathways are defecive in animal models of hypertension , and if correction of this aberration by pharmacological or genetic interventions can  improve the hypertension.     The results obtained from these studies will eventually provide a basis for new approaches to the management of cardiovascular disease, more particularly, hypertension.",5 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=172333&lang=en
172339,Molecular mechanisms of the immune receptor dectin-1 signaling,Touret  Nicolas,"Touret, Nicolas",University of Alberta,Alberta,Canada,200809,670970.0,Operating Grant,Operating Grants,Biomedical,Infection and Immunity,Biochemistry; Dectin-1; Fungal Infection; Imaging; Macrophages; Signaling,"Infectious diseases continue to be a major cause of mortality worldwide, emphasizing the need for constant expansion of our knowledge on the mechanisms involved in the immune control of pathogens. Understanding how our bodies respond to such life threatening microbes is a priority. By developing new experimental approaches, designed to further detail the relationship between the host and its pathogens, I wish to contribute to the development of new strategies for fighting infectious diseases. Recent discoveries in the domain of innate immunity have highlighted the important role of a new family of proteins. Through these proteins, specialized cells of the innate immune system recognize unique molecule present on the surface of pathogens. These proteins have been named pattern recognition receptors (PRRs) due to their capacity to bind specific pathogen-associated molecular patterns (PAMPs). Dectin-1, a member of this family of immune receptors, is the major receptor for fungal and bacterial beta-glucans. An important feature of this particular PRR relies in its capacity to activate several important processes in immune cells required to counteract microbial infections.
The long-term objectives of this project are to elucidate, at the molecular level, the determinants of dectin-1 mediated activation of the immune system. Classical biochemical and biophysical approaches, combined with the use of single molecule analysis, will address questions about the molecular organization of the receptor, specifically, how ligand binding triggers phagocytosis and cellular activation. Such techniques, with the ability to resolve individual molecule behavior, will certainly shed light on yet undetermined mechanisms and thus strengthen our understanding of the regulation of immune system responses to microbial challenges.",5 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=172339&lang=en
172368,Evolution of cost-free resistance mutations in a Pseudomonas model system,Kassen  Rees,"Kassen, Rees",University of Ottawa,Ontario,Canada,200809,291744.0,Operating Grant,Operating Grants,Biomedical,Genetics,Antibiotic Resistance; Costs Of Resistance; Cystic Fibrosis; Pseudomonas; Selection Experiments; Whole-Genome Sequencing,"The initial optimism accompanying the introduction of antibiotic drugs to control infection over 60 years ago has been
steadily eroded by growing reports of antimicrobial resistance in nearly all human-associated pathogens. What little faith
remains in the long-term utility of antibiotics for treatment is now being undermined on a second front: resistance, once it
evolves, is not readily lost when the offending antibiotic is removed from general use. The causes of persistence remain
unresolved and form the subject of this proposal. The main objective of the work outlined here is to evaluate the hypothesis
that the resistance mutations that most commonly arise in clinical settings actually pay little or no cost of resistance in the
absence of antibiotic. Our work makes use of a combination of experimental, genomic and epidemiological approaches using
resistance to quinolone antibiotics in two Pseudomonas species as a model. The results of this work will thus be crucial to
designing strategies to eliminate or control resistance.",3 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=172368&lang=en
172371,Endobiotics glucuronidation: a novel therapeutic avenue for metabolic and endocrine diseases,Barbier  Olivier,"Barbier, Olivier",Universit&eacute; Laval,Qu&eacute;bec,Canada,200809,300000.0,CIHR New Investigator,Salary Programs,Biomedical,"Nutrition, Metabolism and Diabetes",Cardiovascular Diseases; Endobiotics Metabolism; Gene Regulation; Hormonal Diseases; Liver Diseases; Molecular Pharmacology,"Glucuronidation is an enzymatic reaction very well studied for the role its plays in drug elimination. However, this reaction also affects a wide variety of endogenous substance. The aim of our research program is to determine whether controlling the elimination of specific endogenous compounds through the use of novel drugs can be of therapeutic value in the treatment of various pathologies such as liver diseases, cardiovascular diseases or prostate cancer.",5 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=172371&lang=en
172376,Human papillomavirus (HPV) perinatal transmission and risk of HPV persistance among children: A pilot cohort study.,Trottier  Helen,"Trottier, Helen","Centre hospitalier universitaire Sainte-Justine (Montr&eacute;al, Qu&eacute;bec)",Qu&eacute;bec,Canada,200809,400929.0,Operating Grant,Operating Grants,Social / Cultural / Environmental / Population Health,Infection and Immunity,Children'S Health; Cohort Study; Human Papillomavirus; Perinatal Transmission; Pregnancy,"The role of Human papillomaviruses (HPV) in the pathogenesis of malignant tumours has been well described. HPV is recognized unequivocally as the main causal factor for cervical cancer, is thought to be responsible for a substantial proportion of many other anogenital neoplasms and a non negligible portion of head and neck cancers (oral cavity, pharynx, and larynx) and is suspected to play a causal role in many other neoplasms, such as conjunctiva carcinoma. HPV is the most common sexually transmitted infection in the world and the prevalence can reach 30-40% among young sexually active women of reproductive age. A high probability of perinatal transmission of HPV is supported by several studies, although methodological limitations (small sample size, short follow-up, sample contamination, etc.) hamper definitive conclusions. Even if it is imperative to answer questions about HPV in children, currently there is a paucity of firm data available. This pilot cohort study is designed to establish the risk of perinatal transmission of type-specific HPV to the mucosa of newborns (conjunctival, pharyngeal, bucal and genital), delineate the risk factors associated with perinatal transmission, determine the risk of persistence of HPV infection among children, analyse the risk factors associated with persistence, characterize the presence of antibodies against HPV in infected mothers and their children and assess the prevalence of HPV in placenta specimen and its relationship with adverse pregnancy outcome. This pilot project will serve as a template to apply relevant technical and scientific adjustments to the research protocol before going on with a larger sample and longer follow-up. The study will improve our understanding of the natural history of HPV across the lifespan. This, in turn, may identify a possible point at which to intervene to prevent HPV infection.",4 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=172376&lang=en
172382,Mechanism of female sex hormone action on susceptibility and immune responses to HSV-2 infection,Kaushic  Charu,"Kaushic, Charu",McMaster University,Ontario,Canada,200809,653705.0,Operating Grant,Operating Grants,Biomedical,Infection and Immunity,Herpes Simplex Virus; Immune Responses; Knockout Mice; Primary Cell Cultures; Sex Hormones; Sexually Transmitted Diseases; Suscepbility; Women'S Reproductive Health,"Genital herpes is a major health problem. An estimated one in four sexually active adults has actve or inactive genital herpes
infection. For some time now, it is known that menstrual cycle of women can influence susceptibility to STDs and disease
severity. Clinical studies also show that use of oral contraceptives and other hormonal contraceptives such as Depo-Provera
by women correlate with increased chance of getting STI infections, including HIV, HSV-2, Chlamydia. Our previous
research has shown that sex hormones control both susceptibility and immune responses to sexually transmitted infections
including chlamydia and HSV-2. We recently reported that female mice treated with estradiol were protected from herpes
infection while progesterone treated mice had severe genital herpes and inflammation. In the current study, we propose to
understand how the hormonal environment in the reproductive tract affects immunity to hereps infection in this mouse model.
We will study how certain hormones can affect body's defence mechanism in a certain way resulting in better or worse
protection. We will also examine how local environment in the genital tract affects body's protective mechanisms. These
studies will help us understand how hormones affect ability of females to defend against sexually transmitte infections. This
information will be useful particulaly for women who are on hormonal contraceptives on hormone replacement therapies. It
will also help us to understand how we can make use of natural hormones to make better vaccine against herpes, targeted
specifically for women.",5 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=172382&lang=en
172386,"Characterization of a novel, caspase-8 dependent survival pathway in inflammatory neutrophils",Marshall  John C,"Marshall, John C",Unity Health Toronto,Ontario,Canada,200809,501135.0,Operating Grant,Operating Grants,Biomedical,Infection and Immunity,Apoptosis; Cell Signaling; Critical Illness; Innate Immunity; Neutrophils; Sepsis,"White blood cells known as neutrophils form the body's first line of defense against infection.  They release a potent array of substances that kill invading bacteria, and so are essential to surviving a life-threatening infection.  But these same substances can cause unwanted damage to healthy host tissues.  Tissue injury by neutrophils, for example, contributes to a condition known as sepsis in critically ill patients in an ICU, and to joint injury in patients with arthritis. In health, the potential for injury is minimized because of the neutrophil lives for only a very brief period, before dying a death by cellular suicide through a process known as apoptosis.  During inflammation, the neutrophil's ability to undergo apoptosis is inhibited, with the result that its capacity for both host defense and tissue injury is enhanced.  We have found that neutrophil survival is dependent on changes to the structure of an enzyme called caspase-8 that initiates the process of apoptosis.  The addition of a phosphate molecule to an amino acid in capase-8 (a process called phosphorylation) blocks its activity.  In the studies proposed here, we will first determine whether phosphorylated caspase-8 is needed to activate a protein known as PI3 kinase, which regulates the survival program in the neutrophil.   We will define the role in neutrophil survival of a new survival gene that we have recently identified and called ILIP-1 (Interleukin-1-Induced Protein-1).  These processes - caspase-8 phosphorylation, PI3 kinase activation, and expression of ILIP-1 - comprise an integrated complex that we have termed the 'casapase-8 survivalsome'.  Finally, we will determine whether modulation of the survivalsome in neutrophils from critically ill patients with sepsis can restore the normal expression of apoptosis.  Together the studies will provide the insights necessary to develop new treatments for life-threatening inflammation that are based on preventing the persistence of inflammation.",5 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=172386&lang=en
172390,Investigating the role of mutated UFM1 in a recessive late-onset cerebellar ataxia (LOCA) that often evolves into a multiple system atrophy of cerebellar subtype (MSA-C),Brais  Bernard,"Brais, Bernard",Centre hospitalier de l'Universit&eacute; de Montr&eacute;al (CHUM),Qu&eacute;bec,Canada,200809,323988.0,Operating Grant,Operating Grants,Biomedical,"Neurosciences, Mental Health and Addiction",Ataxia; Cerebellum; Gene; Multiple System Atrophy; Neurodegeneration; Positional Cloning,"Late-onset ataxias have largely been considered as either milder forms of dominant ataxias or sporadic diseases seemingly not caused by genetic factors. Their prevalence is unknown, but together they are poorly recognized cause of decreased mobility in aging. Recruitment over the last two years has led to our present cohort of 34 families which includes 58 definitive cases. The major clinical feature is the onset during the six and seventh decades (mean: 60.4) of gait ataxia in individuals with previously normal motor performance. The mode of transmission is clearly recessive. A genome-wide scan combined to further genotyping in 11 families uncovered the original locus (multipoint LOD score 5.18). Sequencing of the ubiquitin-fold modifier 1 (UFM1) gene uncovered seven mutations. This application proposes to better describe this condition, its overlap with Multiple System Atrophy and establish how UFM1 mutations lead to neurodegeneration.",3 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=172390&lang=en
172393,Urinary Tract Defects:Identifying Causative Genes from Mouse Models,Gupta  Indra R,"Gupta, Indra R",Research Institute of the McGill University Health Centre,Qu&eacute;bec,Canada,200809,387135.0,Operating Grant,Operating Grants,Biomedical,"Human Development, Child and Youth Health",Kidney And Urinary Tract Development; Mouse Genetics; Vesicoureteric Reflux,"Our laboratory has discovered a mouse model that has a congenital urinary tract defect known as vesicoureteric reflux.  In this grant, we will use this mouse model to understand the genetic basis of vesicoureteric reflux and to elucidate the mechanism by which the ureter fails to insert correctly into the bladder wall.  In the final aim of this grant, we will determine whether the gene (s) that are mutated in this mouse model are associated with vesicoureteric reflux in humans.",3 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=172393&lang=en
172402,Regulation of cystathionine gamma-lyase expression in vascular smooth muscle cells,Yang  Guangdong,"Yang, Guangdong","Lakehead University (Thunder Bay, Ontario)",Ontario,Canada,200809,330649.0,Operating Grant,Operating Grants,Biomedical,Circulatory and Respiratory Health,Cystathionine Gamma-Lyase; Hydrogen Sulfide; Knockout Mice; Microrna-21; Smooth Muscle Cells; Specificity Protein-1,"H2S has been traditionally known as a gas of ""rotten egg"". But, now we know this gas is also generated in our body. Cystathionine gamma-lyase (CSE), a major H2S-producing gene, has been shown to be involved in certain vascular disorders. The mechanisms why CSE is involved have not been fully understood.  The proposed study seeks to explore the regulation and control of CSE and H2S in blood vessle cells as well as their effects on cell growth. The regulation of CSE gene expresion may happen at molecular levels. By computer-related study, we firstly identified multiple regulators (miR-21 and Sp1) for CSE gene. To further test our hypothesis, firstly, the regulation relationship of these regulators on CSE will be further investigated at cellular and molecular levels using multiple techniques, including gene cloning, gene mutation, transfection, RNA silencing, quantitative determination of RNA and protein, etc.  Secondly, the effects of these regulators on H2S production and blood vessel cell growth as well as the underlying mechanisms will be examined.  We also will use a specific mouse model, CSE gene knockout mice, to explore the specifial roles of these regulators on controlling CSE and H2S production as well as cell growth in blood vessel cells. With this study, the importance of CSE/H2S system in regulating vascular structure and function will be better understood, and strategies can be perceived to target the altered CSE expression and H2S effect on blood vessels under various vascular diseases.",3 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=172402&lang=en
172407,Exploring the disease-modifying potential of calcium channel blockers in Parkinson's disease: Using population-based administrative data to inform clinical trials.,Marras  Connie,"Marras, Connie",University Health Network (Toronto),Ontario,Canada,200809,65453.0,Operating Grant,Operating Grants,Clinical,Health Services and Policy Research,Health Services Research; Parkinson'S Disease; Prognosis; Treatment,"There is evidence from laboratory models that a class of medication commonly used to treat high blood pressure (dihydropyridine calcium channel blockers, DHP CCBs) may be protective against the progression of Parkinson's disease.  This project will compare the rate of progression of parkinsonism in patients exposed and unexposed to calcium channel blockers using the health care administrative databases of Ontario.  Rate of progression will be assessed by time to requiring drug treatment, institutionalization and death.  If slower rate of progression is identified in those taking DHP CCBs, this will represent the first human evidence of a beneficial effect of this class of agents and justify further research in the Parkinson's disease population.  There is a critical need for treatments that slow the progression of Parkinson's disease.
This project will lay the foundation for other projects investigating the effects of commonly used medications on outcomes in Parkinson's disease.",2 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=172407&lang=en
172416,Anomalies dans le contrôle de la réponse des cellules endométriales à l'IL-1 : rôle dans la physiopathologie de l'endométriose.,Akoum  Ali,"Akoum, Ali",Universit&eacute; Laval,Qu&eacute;bec,Canada,200809,615074.0,Operating Grant,Operating Grants,Clinical,Gender and Health,Angiogénèse; Cellules Endométriales; Cellules Endométriosiques; Culture Cellule; Cytokines; Elisa; Endomètre; Endométriose; Gel Shift; Il-1; Immunocytofluorescence; Inflammation; Modèle In Vivo; Prolifération; Promoteur; Real Time-Pcr; Récepteurs; Signalisation; Sirna; Survie Cellulaire; Transfection; Western Blot; Zymographie,"L'endométriose, croissance de tissu endométial souvent dans l'abdomen, est une maladie fréquente (8 à 10% de femmes en période reproductive) causant infertilité et douleurs abdominales. La maladie dépend des hormones du cycle, mais elle est souvent associée à de l'inflammation dans l'abdomen et dans l'endomètre à l'intérieur de l'utérus. Nos recherches on montré l'existence d'une déficience dans un système spécifique de contrôle de cette inflammation dans l'endomètre (le récepteur de l'interleukine-1 type 2), laquelle se conjugue à une surexpression du récepteur d'activation type 1 dans les implants. Cette déficience peut jouer un rôle clé dans l'initiation de l'inflammation dans la cavité abdominale, là où on trouve les lésions d'endométriose, dans l'aptitude de ces cellules à se développer à l'extérieur de la cavité utérine et former des lésions d'endométiose et notre but est d'en connaître les mécanismes, et les implications quant au développement de la maladie. Nous croyons que la recherche proposée pourrait avoir un impact considérable dans l'endométriose pour mieux comprendre la physiopathologie de cette maladie et la mise en place de nouvelles approches diagnostiques et thérapeutiques.",5 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=172416&lang=en
172420,Redefining the phenotype in complex diseases through latent classes to model intra- and inter-family heterogeneity: application to genetic linkage and association analysis.,Labbe  Aurelie,"Labbe, Aurelie",McGill University,Qu&eacute;bec,Canada,200809,185358.0,Operating Grant,Operating Grants,Social / Cultural / Environmental / Population Health,Genetics,Gene Expression Data; Genetic Basis Of Complex Diseases; Genetic Heterogeneity; Genetic Linkage Analysis; Latent Class Analysis; Multivariate Phenotypes,"Identifying the genes involved in complex diseases such as cardio-vascular disease, diabetes, asthma and psychiatric disorders is a challenge in Human genetics. The task is difficult because what we see as one disease is often a collection of several disease sub-types that, despite sharing clinical similarities, are caused by different genes and other factors The general objective of our proposal is to develop statistical tools to distinguish the disease sub-types based on the patterns of clinical measurements, taken on patients participating in clinical studies. Once we identify in which disease subtype each patient belongs to, we can apply genetic analysis methods to find the genes causing each sub-type of disease. Specifically, we focus on studies where clinical measurements have been assessed on entire families.  Individuals within families are obviously related to each other and the statistical model we develop specifically takes into account the individuals kinships.  This novel method will increase the ability of researchers to find the genes responsible for complex diseases. Finding those genes will provide a better understanding of complex diseases that may ultimately lead to improved preventive and therapeutic interventions.",3 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=172420&lang=en
172441,Prospective Evaluation of Long-term Outcomes after Pulmonary Embolism: The ELOPE Study,Kahn  Susan R,"Kahn, Susan R; Granton, John T; Hirsch, Andrew M",CIUSSS de Centre-Ouest-de-l'Ile-de-Montr&eacute;al-Jewish General,Qu&eacute;bec,Canada,200809,479053.0,Operating Grant,Operating Grants,Clinical,Circulatory and Respiratory Health,Exercise Capacity; Longterm Outcomes; Natural History; Pulmonary Embolism; Quality Of Life; Risk Stratification,"Venous thromboembolism (VTE) is a serious cardiovascular condition. VTE consists of deep vein thrombosis (blood clots in
the veins of the leg) and pulmonary embolism (PE) (blood clots lodging in lung arteries). PE, the most serious form of VTE,
affects about 30,000 Canadians each year. Most patients are expected to survive a PE if diagnosis and treatment are
initiated early. However, very little is known about the long term effects of PE on one's health. In this study we will carefully
evaluate the long-term impact of PE on heart and lung function, quality of life, ability to work, symptoms of breathlessness
and functional status of patients one year after their initial diagnosis and treatment for PE. We will try to determine which
features of PE at the time of diagnosis or during follow-up are associated with poorer outcomes. Our results will provide
new, important information on the long term prognosis of PE for patients and physicians and could influence future
preventive or treatment strategies for this condition.",4 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=172441&lang=en
172443,"Toward Reducing the Risk for Violence-Related Adverse Events among People with Major Mental Disorders: A Prospective, Repeated-Measures Study",Douglas  Kevin S,"Douglas, Kevin S","Simon Fraser University (Burnaby, B.C.)",British Columbia,Canada,200809,710376.0,Operating Grant,Operating Grants,Clinical,"Neurosciences, Mental Health and Addiction",Longitudinal Cohort Design; Mental Health; Risk Reduction; Suicide-Related Behaviour; Victimization; Violence,"Unfortunately, people who suffer from major mental disorders such as schizophrenia, bipolar disorder, and major depression are at heightened risk to experience violence-related events in their lives. This includes suicide and suicide attempts, being victims of violence, and also engaging in violent behaviour. These adverse events are also related to one another. That is, people who experience one of these events are more likely to experience the others, compared to people who do not experience any of them. Separate lines of research have identified numerous risk factors for each adverse event. However, an integrated study of all three adverse events has yet to be undertaken, despite the great promise this holds for reducing the risk of these multiple adverse events. Such a line of research can enhance the health and safety of persons with major mental disorders by increasing the understanding of what factors lead to increased and decreased risk, and informing treatments that can reduce the risk for multiple adverse outcomes. This research project will follow a group of 300 persons with major mental disorders, and a matched comparison group of 150 persons without mental disorders, in order to determine (a) what the common and unique risk and protective factors are for suicide-related behaviour, victimization, and violence, (b) which of these risk and protective factors change over time, and hence would be particularly promising areas for risk-reduction intervention programs. In order to accomplish these goals, the study will include comprehensive baseline assessments of risk and protective factors, and three follow-ups within 12 months.",5 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=172443&lang=en
172445,Finding the endocrine and genetic determinants of obesity: The Newfoundland study,Sun  Guang,"Sun, Guang",Memorial University of Newfoundland,Newfoundland and Labrador,Canada,200809,806518.0,Operating Grant,Operating Grants,Biomedical,"Nutrition, Metabolism and Diabetes",Cck; Food Intake And Macronutrients; Genetically Homogeneous Newfoundland Population; Ghrelin; Gut Hormones; Ppy And Pyy3-36; Snps; Willett Food Frequency Questionnaire,"Eating more than one needs is a major cause of human obesity. The gut produces chemicals called hormones that tell the brain how much we need to eat. If the level of these hormones is abnormal, one may eat too much leading to obesity. We think that one of the reasons why more people in Newfoundland are overweight/obese may be due to abnormal levels of these hormones. This abnormality may be genetic. We will study the role of genes in causing this abnormality in the Newfoundland population. We will measure food intake, total body fat, the level of gut hormones and relate these with any abnormality found in the genes we study. This information will help for development of medication to control abnormal gut hormone levels, food intake and obesity.",5 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=172445&lang=en
172448,Search for genes of hypertension,Hamet  Pavel,"Hamet, Pavel",Centre hospitalier de l'Universit&eacute; de Montr&eacute;al (CHUM),Qu&eacute;bec,Canada,200809,846765.0,Operating Grant,Operating Grants,Biomedical,Circulatory and Respiratory Health,Environmental Exposures; Epigenomics; Hypertension; Obesity; Personal Risk Prediction; Whole-Genome Association,"Hypertension (HT) is a well recognised global disease burden, which has yet to be resolved. Genomic determinants
contribute significantly to HT and cardiovascular outcomes, which tend to cluster in families; however, their impact is blurred
with age and progressive exposure to environmental factors. That is probably one of the reasons for only moderate success
in determination of common genomic variants causative for HT in spite of significant endeavours in genomic analysis of
hypertension. The so far identified variants contribute only modestly to overall risk. While genomic determinants are not
modifiable, the degree of DNA methylation (epigenomics), resulting in modification of transcription of specific genes, and the
telomeric length, are modifiable, reflecting past and current impacts of environmental factors. We hypothesize that
integrating the information from genomic signatures of HT with progressively modifiable parameters will enhance our
capacity to predict and prevent cardiovascular outcomes. To achieve this we will: a) analyze outcomes, temporal
characteristics and familial clustering using hospital and genealogical records; b) partition hypertension into clinically and
genetically defined subsets along phenotypic and genomic characteristics; c) search for genomic signatures of early nonfatal
and fatal cardiovascular outcomes utilizing enhanced level of combined genomic and epigenomic analyses in defined
subsets of hypertensive families d) use results of the above to develop ""Personal Risk Prediction"" tools in collaboration with
our bioinformatics co-investigators and in partnership with IBM Research. The goal of our research is to develop predictive
medicine tools to help doctors diagnose risks before they manifest, with a potential of primary prevention to reduce diseases
burden.",5 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=172448&lang=en
172462,Assessing the impact of healthy eating and physical activity policies on school based practices and health and health behaviours of children in Nova Scotia,Veugelers  Paul J,"Veugelers, Paul J; Kirk, Sara F",University of Alberta,Alberta,Canada,200809,737908.0,Operating Grant,Operating Grants,Social / Cultural / Environmental / Population Health,"Nutrition, Metabolism and Diabetes",Childhood Obesity; Healthy Eating And Active Living Strategies; Policy Evaluation; Population Health; Primary Prevention; School Health,"Childhood obesity is a major public health concern in Canada. The Children's Lifestyle and School Performance Study (CLASS) was conducted in 2003 and demonstrated the extent of this concern in Nova Scotia by identifying that 32.9% of grade 5 children were overweight, with 9.9% considered obese. CLASS also shed light on the significance of unhealthy eating and sedentary behaviours of children in Nova Scotia and contributed to the development of recent provincial policies and programs addressing these issues. However, the effectiveness of these policies and programs is not known. We do not know how policies and programs have translated into healthier school practices or if and how this translates into healthy eating and active living behaviours and healthier body weights among children. Knowledge of the effectiveness of policies and programs is important to justify past investments and inform future policy decisions.
The proposed research will collect data and analyze changes related to healthy eating and active living at four different levels: programs and policies by the (1) Provincial Government and (2) among School Boards; (3) school practices; and characteristics of (4) children and families. Qualitative and quantitative methods are proposed to study how Provincial and School Boards policies and programs have affected school practices and to shed light to how changes in policies and practices are related to changes in diet, physical activity and body weights between 2003 (original CLASS observations) and 2011 (proposed data collection). 
The results of this study will demonstrate which policies, programs and practices have been significant in addressing factors related to children's health and health behaviours. This research will help to inform future strategies by demonstrating ""what has worked and why"" in a province where childhood obesity rates are among the highest in the country.",4 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=172462&lang=en
172468,A Translational Approach to Neuro-Inflammation and Functional Outcomes After Human Spinal Cord Injury,Kwon  Brian K,"Kwon, Brian K",University of British Columbia,British Columbia,Canada,200809,351444.0,Operating Grant,Operating Grants,Biomedical,"Neurosciences, Mental Health and Addiction",Behavioral Outcomes; Biomarkers; Human Clinical Trials; Multiplex Bead Array Technology; Translational Research,"Spinal cord injuries result in devastating paralysis, often in young, otherwise healthy individuals. A great deal of scientific
research into spinal cord repair/regeneration has been conducted over the past 30 years, offering much hope to individuals
with this catastrophic injury. Despite this, all therapies which have shown great promise in animal models of spinal cord
injury have failed to demonstrate benefit in human clinical trials. Hence, there are no treatments currently available to
reverse the paralysis of spinal cord injury.
When the spinal cord is injured, an inflammatory reaction is triggered. This inflammatory response is thought to contribute to
further damage. In this research project, we will investigate the inflammatory response to spinal cord injury in human
patients by sampling their spinal fluid and measuring proteins that regulate inflammation. We will correlate these
inflammatory proteins with the severity of paralysis and the behavioral/functional recovery of these patients. This will
establish a method of classifying patients according to biological, rather than functional criteria. We will then test whether
these proteins are influenced by a drug called minocycline, which is currently being tested in patients with acute spinal cord
injuries. This will help us identify biological methods of measuring treatment response.
Establishing biomarkers of injury severity and treatment response will be extremely valuable in facilitating clinical trials of
new SCI treatments, and will potentially speed up the process of validating new therapies for this devastating injury. Also, by
revealing new information on the human inflammatory response to injury, we will identify important aspects of the acute
pathophysiology of spinal cord injuries that may be important targets for new treatments.",3 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=172468&lang=en
172475,Cellular basis of synaptic communication between inhibitory interneurons in the hippocampus,Topolnik  Lisa Y,"Topolnik, Lisa Y",Universit&eacute; Laval,Qu&eacute;bec,Canada,200809,616090.0,Operating Grant,Operating Grants,Biomedical,"Neurosciences, Mental Health and Addiction",Electrophysiology; Inhibitory Interneuron; Network Computation; Synaptic Transmission; Two-Photon Microscopy,"How circuits of neurons process information depends on the dynamic dialogue between two network elements: principal cells and local circuit inhibitory interneurons. As network gatekeepers, GABAergic inhibitory interneurons control all stages of information processing by principal neurons, from signal integration to generating spikes and synchronized network oscillations. To perform these precise operations, inhibitory interneurons must be tightly organized in functional ensembles. In the hippocampus, the brain structure involved in learning and memory, a specific population of inhibitory interneurons selectively innervates other GABAergic cells, and may provide the cellular basis for such higher-level control of network computations. However, the physiological properties and the role of these cells in the local circuit dialogue remain unknown. We propose that the specific physiological organization of these interneuron-specific interneurons (ISIs) allows them to efficiently integrate multiple cortical and subcortical inputs and to act as a fine-tuning device sculpting the inhibition received by principal cells. We will use a combination of whole-cell patch-clamp electrophysiology, two-photon microscopy, and pharmacology in acute slices of mouse hippocampus to investigate: (1) how ISIs integrate signals and produce spikes; (2) how their signal integration is affected by the activation of subcortical inputs; (3) how connections between inhibitory interneurons are modified by changes in activity; and (4) how the inhibitory control of local circuit inhibition directs the network activity.
This investigation should provide essential information about the functional organization of inhibitory interneurons specialized to control network inhibition. It will also yield new important insights into how the interactions between specific neural elements form working neural circuits, and how these may break down in brain disorders.",5 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=172475&lang=en
172476,The implications of adolescent health and health risk behaviors for  health in early adulthood: Sources of continuities and discontinuities in developmental trajectories over 10 years,Leadbeater  Bonnie J,"Leadbeater, Bonnie J",University of Victoria (British Columbia),British Columbia,Canada,200809,668379.0,Operating Grant,Operating Grants,Social / Cultural / Environmental / Population Health,Population and Public Health,Adolescent Health; Health Promotion; Lifespan Health; Longitudinal Research; Mental Health; Social Determinants Of Health,"Can we predict adult health based on youth characteristics and experiences? This question is addressed in an interdisciplinary program of research that will use six waves of data to follow a cohort of youth (initially ages 12 to 18) across a total of 10 years. Our research aims to inform strategies for community development, policy and education that can to advance healthy foundations for young adults. Assuming a lifespan, perspective, we hypothesize that health and health risk behaviors affect each other and are affected by risks and protective factors that characterize both individuals and the contexts in which the live. We highlight an important set of indicators that, together, paint a profile of health and health risks in the early adult years (physical health, mental health, stable relationships, low health risk behaviors and accruing labour market capital).We hypothesize that changes in  these five interdependent indicators of health in young adulthood are, to some degree, founded on stable individual differences that are already evident in adolescence. We also examine the prospective effects of multivariate risk factors (including disruptions and conflict in family of origin, deviant peer associations, serious injuries, weight gain, early school leaving, and early parenting, relationship aggression) and protective factors (family support [financial and emotional], peer support, on time graduation from high school, postsecondary school engagement, stable romantic relationships). These predictors can be and have been targeted by policy and prevention programs aiming to improve health across the lifespan and they have been extensively shown to effect late adolescent outcomes, however, their significance for health in young adulthood is largely unknown.",5 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=172476&lang=en
172481,Exploring the disease-modifying potential of calcium channel blockers in Parkinson's disease: Using population-based administrative data to inform clinical trials.,Marras  Connie,"Marras, Connie",University Health Network (Toronto),Ontario,Canada,200809,300000.0,CIHR New Investigator,Salary Programs,Clinical,Health Services and Policy Research,Calcium Channel Blockers; Health Care Administrative Databases; Parkinson'S Disease; Prognosis,"There is evidence from laboratory models that a class of medication commonly used to treat high blood pressure (dihydropyridine calcium channel blockers, DHP CCBs) may be protective against the progression of Parkinson's disease.  This project will explore the impact of greater exposure to DHP CCBs on the rate of progression of Parkinson's disease using the health care administrative databases of Ontario.  Rate of progression will be assessed by time to requiring drug treatment, admission to long term care and death.  If slower rate of progression is identified in those taking DHP CCBs, this will provide important justification for studies of DHP CCBs in Parkinson's disease patients.  There is a critical need for treatments that slow the progression of Parkinson's disease.  This project will lay the foundation for other projects investigating the effects of commonly used medications on outcomes in Parkinson's disease.  Together these projects will form an integral part of the research program that will be supported by this New Investigator Award.",5 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=172481&lang=en
172482,Control of disease recurrence by tumor-infiltrating T cells in ovarian cancer,Nelson  Brad H,"Nelson, Brad H","BC Cancer, part of PHSA (Victoria)",British Columbia,Canada,200809,394059.0,Operating Grant,Operating Grants,Biomedical,Cancer Research,Antigens; Chemotherapy; Immunotherapy; Ovarian Cancer; T Cells; Whole Transcriptome Sequencing,"It has recently been shown that many ovarian cancer patients mount immune responses against their tumor. This is reflected in the fact that many ovarian tumors are densely packed with ""T cells"", a type of white blood cell that fights viral and bacterial infections, as well as cancer. Importantly, patients with large numbers of T cells in their tumor live longer after chemotherapy compared to patients with fewer T cells in their tumor. However, we do not know which features of the tumor are being recognized by T cells. Recent work has shown that chemotherapy induces mutations in cancer cells, and some of these mutations make the cancer cells resistant to chemotherapy. It is likely that some tumor mutations may be recognized as ""foreign"" by the immune system. 

Based on these considerations, we hypothesize that chemotherapy generates new tumor mutations that are recognized by patients' T cells, which in turn help prevent tumor recurrence by killing remaining tumor cells. We propose to use two innovative methods to identify new tumor mutations and T cell responses in ovarian cancer, focusing on patients who show a favorable response to chemotherapy. 

Aim 1. To identify tumor mutations that induce antibody responses in patients. 
Aim 2. To use state-of-the-art genomic methods to identify tumor mutations caused by chemotherapy.  
Aim 3. To determine whether chemotherapy-induced tumor mutations are recognized by T cells. 
Aim 4. To determine whether recurrent ovarian tumors contain T cells triggered by chemotherapy.  

This will be the first study to investigate whether chemotherapy generates new mutations that stimulate T cell responses in patients with ovarian cancer. With a better understanding of how chemotherapy affects the immune system, we believe it will be possible in future to improve clinical outcomes further by enhancing immune responses using drugs, vaccines or T cell infusions.",3 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=172482&lang=en
172484,A Translational Approach to Neuro-Inflammation and Behavioral Outcomes After Spinal Cord Injury,Kwon  Brian K,"Kwon, Brian K",University of British Columbia,British Columbia,Canada,200809,300000.0,CIHR New Investigator,Salary Programs,Biomedical,"Neurosciences, Mental Health and Addiction",Biomarkers; Human Clinical Trials; Multiplex Bead Array Technology; Translational Research,"Spinal cord injuries result in devastating paralysis, often in young, otherwise healthy individuals. A great deal of scientific
research into spinal cord repair/regeneration has been conducted over the past 30 years, offering much hope to individuals
with this catastrophic injury. Despite this, all therapies which have shown great promise in animal models of spinal cord
injury have failed to demonstrate benefit in human clinical trials. Hence, there are no treatments currently available to
reverse the paralysis of spinal cord injury.
When the spinal cord is injured, an inflammatory reaction is triggered. This inflammatory response is thought to contribute to
further damage. In this research project, we will investigate the inflammatory response to spinal cord injury in human
patients by sampling their spinal fluid and measuring proteins that regulate inflammation. We will correlate these
inflammatory proteins with the severity of paralysis and the behavioral/functional recovery of these patients. This will
establish a method of classifying patients according to biological, rather than functional criteria. We will then test whether
these proteins are influenced by a drug called minocycline, which is currently being tested in patients with acute spinal cord
injuries. This will help us identify biological methods of measuring treatment response.

Establishing biomarkers of injury severity and treatment response will be extremely valuable in facilitating clinical trials of
new SCI treatments, and will potentially speed up the process of validating new therapies for this devastating injury. Also, by
revealing new information on the human inflammatory response to injury, we will identify important aspects of the acute
pathophysiology of spinal cord injuries that may be important targets for new treatments.",5 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=172484&lang=en
172486,CXC chemokines in basal cell carcinomas,McElwee  Kevin J,"McElwee, Kevin J",University of British Columbia,British Columbia,Canada,200809,300000.0,CIHR New Investigator,Salary Programs,Biomedical,Musculoskeletal Health and Arthritis,Basal Cell Carcinoma; Cell Singaling; Cxc Chemokines; Rodent Models; Skin Cancer,"A form of skin cancer called basal cell carcinoma (BCC) develops due to sun light induced gene mutations in skin and hair follicle cells. Over 70,000 cases of BCC occur in Canada each year which are normally treated by expensive surgical removal. Recent studies by the grant applicants have identified a number of genes that are highly expressed in BCCs as compared to healthy skin. In particular we have found CXC chemokines are produced at high levels by BCCs. CXC chemokines are proteins that are released by the cells as a way to communicate with each other. We will use cell cultures and cancer models to identify the importance of CXC chemokine communication in BCC growth. First we will show how these products can stimulate BCC growth. Then we will try to prevent BCC development by blocking the actions of these CXC chemokines. This study will help us to understand the mechanisms involved in BCC development and we may identify new ways to block their growth. New drug treatments for BCC may reduce or even avoid the need for surgical removal of the cancer. Drug application should be a cheaper and less physically and psychologically damaging treatment approach for patients than surgical removal.",5 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=172486&lang=en
172491,Hypercapnia as Therapy for Neonatal Pulmonary Hypertension,Jankov  Robert P,"Jankov, Robert P","Sunnybrook Research Institute (Toronto, Ontario)",Ontario,Canada,200809,579880.0,Operating Grant,Operating Grants,Biomedical,"Human Development, Child and Youth Health",Carbon Dioxide; Hypercapnia; Hypoxia; Inflammation; Pulmonary Hypertension,"Pulmonary hypertension (high blood pressure in the lung) is a complication that requires medical treatment in about 1 in 500 newborn infants and commonly leads to death in the most severe cases.  This disease is common in the newborn period because of two factors: 1) a failure of the normal dilation of blood vessels in the lung at birth that allows oxygen to enter the blood, and 2) rapid development of thickening of the walls of blood vessels (known as remodeling), which blocks the normal passage of blood through the lung and prevents vessels from properly relaxing.  The treatments we currently have available to treat babies with pulmonary hypertension often do not work, do not improve remodeling of blood vessels and have not been shown to decrease death or to improve outcome in the long term.  The overall goal of my research is to develop more effective treatments for the prevention and treatment of pulmonary hypertension in newborns.  To facilitate this goal, my laboratory has developed two newborn rat models of chronic pulmonary hypertension, which have many similarities to human newborns that do not respond to conventional treatments.  Published and preliminary work from my laboratory indicates that the induction of high carbon dioxide levels in the blood (hypercapnia) can prevent lung injury and improve pulmonary hypertension in newborn rats.  The aims of our proposed work are to further define the ""dose"" of hypercapnia that is required to effectively treat pulmonary hypertension, to better understand how hypercapnia works, to ascertain its effects on lung development and to see whether its beneficial effects will last into adult life.  This work will provide new insights with a high potential for clinical translation.  Hypercapnia has great potential as an effective and enticingly simple therapeutic approach to an otherwise intractable problem.",5 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=172491&lang=en
172507,Neural mechanisms of familiarity assessment,Kohler  Stefan,"Kohler, Stefan",Western University (Ontario),Ontario,Canada,200809,424175.0,Operating Grant,Operating Grants,Biomedical,"Neurosciences, Mental Health and Addiction",Deja Vu; Epilepsy; Fmri; Medial Temporal Lobe; Memory Impairments; Recognition Memory,"The ability to distinguish between new and previously encountered parts of the environment and people is of critical benefit to daily behaviour. We constantly take advantage of this ability, such as when we greet a colleague from work at the shopping mall, but don't greet strangers. Recognition of prior occurrence is thought to rely on two distinct mental processes, i.e. familiarity and recollection. We can find ourselves in situations in which we experience a sense of familiarity with another individual or with a specific place, but cannot recollect anything about the circumstances of a prior encounter. In other situations, we may experience feelings of familiarity in combination with a detailed recollection of a past episode involving this person or place. The general goal of the proposed research is to understand how the human brain generates feelings of familiarity. Although familiarity has long been known as an essential memory component in psychological theory, the underlying brain mechanisms remain unclear. From a health perspective, it is critical to elucidate these mechanisms because impairments in feelings of familiarity represent a clinical feature of various neurological diseases, including Alzheimer's disease, stroke, and epilepsy. It is easy to see that they would be debilitating in daily life given that such impairments can even affect the ability to recognize close relatives. Under some circumstances, they can also result in clinically abnormal feelings of déjà vu, i.e., in persistent experiences 'that things look more familiar than they should'. Here, we plan to shed light on the brain mechanisms that cause impairments in feelings of familiarity in epilepsy. We also plan to examine the brain mechanisms of intact feelings of familiarity by using modern brain imaging methods in healthy individuals. Together, the proposed research promises to lead to a better understanding of fundamental memory mechanisms with important clinical applications.",5 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=172507&lang=en
172511,Superantigens in autoimmunity,Yeung  Rae S,"Yeung, Rae S",Hospital for Sick Children (Toronto),Ontario,Canada,200809,461325.0,Operating Grant,Operating Grants,Biomedical,Musculoskeletal Health and Arthritis,Animal Models; Apoptosis; Co-Stimulation; Flow Cytometry; Immunohistochemistry; Superantigens,"The overall objective of our project is to understand why the body damages the blood vessels in Kawasaki disease (KD), the leading cause of acquired heart disease in Canadian children. An infection starts KD. An infection-triggered immune response directed against our own bodies is a common theme in autoimmune disease. In a healthy person, the cells, especially the T-cells, in the immune system die and the immune response turns off after an infection. In a person with autoimmune disease the cells of the immune system do not die and keeping going and attack parts of our own body. We have evidence that co-stimulation signals, molecules that are important in activating and keeping T-cells alive, are the key to helping T-cells escape death. This project will determine how co-stimulation rescues T-cells. We have developed an animal model which looks and acts like KD in children.  We will use this model to answer our questions and apply what we learn to better understand the disease in children with KD. We will determine what governs the expression of co-stimulatory molecules associated with development of disease and why this leads to coronary heart disease in children. Not only will our work challenge existing paradigms and open a new chapter in autoimmune disease research, but have important implications for improving therapy of affected children.",3 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=172511&lang=en
172537,Viral host interactions of the dicistroviridae family,Jan  Eric,"Jan, Eric",University of British Columbia,British Columbia,Canada,200809,300000.0,CIHR New Investigator,Salary Programs,Biomedical,Infection and Immunity,Ires; Polysome; Ribosome; Rna; Translational Control; Virus,"Viruses have evolved strategies to infect host cells and disrupt normal cellular functions while hijacking critical host machineries to express viral genes. However, the host can counteract by using innate antiviral responses to detect and defend against viruses. Revealing the molecular mechanisms between the battle of the virus and host is vital in our fight against clinically relevant viruses. One mechanism that some viruses use is through an IRES. In our cells, molecular machines, called ribosomes, translate our genes into proteins, but some viruses, such as hepatitis C virus and poliovirus, possess an IRES to hijack the ribosome to preferentially express their viral proteins. We need a better understanding of these mechanisms in order to fight viral infections.
      This proposal will gain insight into these viral IRESs by elucidating the mechanisms by which a unique IRES, found within an insect virus called the cricket paralysis virus (CrPV), can hijack the ribosome. Because the CrPV IRES directly recruits ribosomes without any factors, it provides a simple and powerful model to study IRES functions and will lay the foundation for studying more complex IRESs. Our previous work was seminal in delineating important CrPV IRES functions. Building on this work, we aim: 1) to use innovative techniques to map the specific IRES elements that interact with the ribosome, 2) to determine how the CrPV disrupt cellular functions that leads to IRES activity in Drosophila (fruit fly) cells, and 3) to elucidate the host antiviral responses in Drosophila cells, which have not been fully investigated. Because molecular signals are often conserved, the study of Drosophila antiviral responses is relevant in revealing fundamental virus host interactions in humans. Armed with these interdisciplinary approaches, we will gain valuable into details of viral IRES mechanics, the host disruptions by the CrPV that leads to IRES activity, and the identity of key antiviral responses.",5 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=172537&lang=en
172558,Signaling mechanisms of the p75 neurotrophin receptor,Barker  Philip A,"Barker, Philip A",Montreal Neurological Institute-Hospital,Qu&eacute;bec,Canada,200809,935250.0,Operating Grant,Operating Grants,Biomedical,"Neurosciences, Mental Health and Addiction",Apoptosis; Jun Kinase; Neurotrophin; Nf-Kb; Traf Proteins; Trk,"Loss of neuronal cells is a hallmark of many diseases of the nervous system. and in many cases, this is mediated by loss of survival signals and activation of a process of cell suicide, termed apoptosis. My lab is concerned with identifying the precise cellular signals that regulate cellular life and decisions in the nervous system. 
     This proposal is designed to examine the cellular pathways activated a cell surface receptor termed p75NTR. Previous studies have shown that this single receptor can, in some circumstances, cause cells to survive but in others, to facilitate their death. The mechanisms controlling these processes are complicated but are beginning to be clarified. 
     In this proposal, we will address i) how p75NTR causes cells to commit suicide, ii) how p75NTR present in non-neuronal cells activates death pathways in neurons and iii) how p75NTR can, in some cases, facilitate cellular survival pathways.",5 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=172558&lang=en
172565,Role of the Tumor Suppressor Gene BRCA1 in Adverse Cardiac Remodeling,Verma  Subodh S,"Verma, Subodh S",Unity Health Toronto,Ontario,Canada,200809,330367.0,Operating Grant,Operating Grants,Biomedical,Circulatory and Respiratory Health,Brca1; Dna Damage; Haemodynamics; Left Ventricular Dysfunction; Molecular Biology; Myocardial Infarction,"Heart attacks are leading causes of deaths in the world.  They are medically known as myocardial infarctions and occur when blood and oxygen supplies to a part of the heart are blocked.  These in turn cause the heart cells in the damaged and surrounding areas to adapt and/or die which can result in heart failure and ultimately death.

DNAs are blueprints that contain instructions to make sure our bodies function properly. DNA damages can cause cell injury, cell adaptations and cell death.  Our objective is to determine if BRCA1, a gene that promotes DNA repair, can protect heart function by reducing heart cell injury and adaptability.

We will use animal and cell models.  We have made a mouse that does not have the BRCA1 gene in the heart.  We will study how injuries to the heart affect heart function as well as heart cell survival and changes in these mice.  We will also give BRCA1 to some of these mice to check if heart function, heart cell survival and changes in heart cells are different from those mice that have not been given BRCA1.  We will shut off or increase the BRCA1 signal in heart cells from rats to study how heart cells respond to different types of stresses.

This is the first project that aims to study how the breast cancer gene BRCA1 may be involved in cell adaptations and survival following heart injuries.  We believe that this approach will help us better understand how and why heart diseases happen and how to make new and better drugs for these illnesses.",3 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=172565&lang=en
172570,Effects of auditory and cognitive deficits on speech understanding in the elderly,Schneider  Bruce A,"Schneider, Bruce A",University of Toronto,Ontario,Canada,200809,557975.0,Operating Grant,Operating Grants,Biomedical,Aging,Aging; Audio-Visual Integration; Auditory Aging; Cognitive Processes; Hearing; Hearing Disorders,"Older adults often find it difficult to understand speech in everyday listening situations.  These difficulties could reflect age-related deterioration in hearing abilities, in cognitive abilities (e.g., memory), or both. For example, when listening to a conversation, hearing declines might cause older adults to mishear individual words more often than younger adults.  This, in turn, will often cause older adults to misinterpret the intended message.  Alternatively, cognitive declines may make it more difficult for older adults to integrate information coming from different conversationalists, leading to misinterpretation of what was said. Our research program is designed to determine the relative contribution of these two kinds of declines to spoken language comprehension so that appropriate steps can be taken to improve language comprehension in older adults (e.g., assistive listening devices for hearing declines; medication and/or therapies for cognitive declines). To date, we have been able to show that declines in hearing abilities rather than declines in cognitive abilities are responsible for most of the comprehension difficulties experienced by healthy older adults when they are listening to sentences, lectures, or simple two-person conversations. We now plan to investigate the relative contribution of these two factors when the speech material becomes cognitively more complex (e.g., multi-talker conversations), and when listening becomes more difficult (e.g., the background contains intelligible but irrelevant speech). In addition, because real-life conversations are usually face to face, we will be studying spoken language comprehension when the listener can both hear and see the talkers so that the results of this research will generalize more readily to real-life situations.",5 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=172570&lang=en
172579,Neuronal correlates for spatial self-motion estimation and motor planning,Green  Andrea M,"Green, Andrea M",Universit&eacute; de Montr&eacute;al,Qu&eacute;bec,Canada,200809,658228.0,Operating Grant,Operating Grants,Biomedical,"Neurosciences, Mental Health and Addiction",Movement Control; Neural Computation; Neurophysiology; Sensory Integration; Spatial Orientation; Vestibular,"Whether running to catch a ball or turning to reach for a coffee cup, our ability to interact behaviorally with the environment depends critically on knowing our motion and orientation in space. As we move, the brain integrates multiple sensory signals to compute estimates of our self-motion. However, this poses a challenge because the way that sensory signals must be combined and interpreted depends on the conditions (context) in which they are sensed. One important contextual influence is gravity. Gravity provides a world-fixed reference (i.e., which way is up/down) for interpreting our motion. To navigate during locomotion or maintain upright posture we rely on information about our motion with respect to this fixed spatial reference. However, because each of our sensors is attached to different body parts, no one sensor provides this information. For example, our vestibular sensors (semicircular canals and otoliths) signal head movement along axes fixed in the head. Thus, when running to catch a ball, the same movement in space (e.g., forward motion) is sensed by one combination of sensors when the head is upright and a different set when the head is tilted backward to look up at the ball. To maintain balance as we run, we must also know our tilt relative to gravity. This too requires combining sensory signals in a head-orientation-dependent way. Gravity thus serves as a fundamental contextual cue for interpreting the motion our sensors encode. The goal of this work is to investigate the contextual role of gravity on the integration of multisensory (vestibular, visual) signals in the brainstem and cerebellum. By better understanding how the brain computes spatial motion estimates that are essential for tasks such as navigation and postural control, it is hoped that this research will lead to improved rehabilitative strategies to counteract spatial disorientation, balance and dizziness disorders, debilitating problems that are particularly common in the elderly.",5 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=172579&lang=en
172595,Novel Therapeutic Strategies For Obstructive Bladder Disease,Bagli  Darius J,"Bagli, Darius J",Hospital for Sick Children (Toronto),Ontario,Canada,200809,440244.0,Operating Grant,Operating Grants,Biomedical,"Human Development, Child and Youth Health",Bladder Obstruction; Distension Hypoxia; Egfr; Fibroproliferation; Iressa; Mtor; Rapamycin; Smooth Muscle,"Our research goal is to find new drug treatments for bladder obstruction. Obstruction creates multiple health problems 
including incontinence, recurrent urine infection, and kidney damage, resulting in nearly $30 billion in annual health care 
costs. Obstruction leads to pressure and distension injury, which is also accompanied by decreased oxygen delivery to the 
bladder muscle (hypoxia). The bladder muscle wall becomes thickened and fibrotic and eventually bladder function fails. We 
have developed an organ model which permits study of the rat bladder in culture. This organ culture system has shown that distension and hypoxia stimuli trigger specific enzymatic and molecular changes which drive smooth muscle overgrowth. Using computer analysis of the genes we have identified to date, expressed by the distended rat organ and by stretched human bladder muscle cells, we have found that 
the mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR) and the epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) pathways may regulate bladder obstruction responses. We observe that the mTOR inhibitor drug rapamycin, is able to block growth of stretched cells and hypoxic cells. We have also reported that EGFR regulates BMSC growth triggered my stretching the organ in culture, and in cultured hypoxic BSMC. Therefore, we are testing the idea that hypoxia regulates muscle responses to 
distension using shared biological pathways.  This project will exploit these two stimuli in our organ system to study 3 areas: 
1. How hypoxia modifies distension responses in the bladder tissue using the mTOR & EGFR pathways, 2. How hypoxia modifies function of the component parts of the mTOR pathway in response to distension, and 3. Assessing rapamycin and the EGFR inhibitor Iressa to treat bladder damage in a live animal model of chronic bladder obstruction. These studies will provide significant new understanding and treatment directions for bladder obstruction.",4 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=172595&lang=en
172596,Matrix metalloproteinase-2 (MMP-2) in myocardial cell death  from oxidative stress injury,Schulz  Richard (Rick),"Schulz, Richard (Rick)",University of Alberta,Alberta,Canada,200809,551521.0,Operating Grant,Operating Grants,Biomedical,Circulatory and Respiratory Health,Apoptosis; Cell Death; Matrix Metalloproteinases; Necrosis; Oxidative Stress; Proteases,"Enhanced oxidative stress is common to several cardiac diseases and can damage heart muscle cells, sometimes leading to cell death.  This of course can result in heart failure.  There are enzymes in heart cells which may be activated as a result of enhanced oxidative stress and contribute to cell injury and death by cutting other proteins into smaller pieces.  These enzymes, known as proteases, are very important in cell injury pathways and inhibiting their activity may prevent injury from oxidative stress.  This proposal will focus particularly on one such protease, matrix metalloproteinase-2 (MMP-2), which has newly discovered biological roles inside of heart muscle cells which may contribute to cell injury and death.  We particularly would like to understand the role of MMP-2 in cell injury and death, and compare its role to other known proteases, as we believe it has distinct undiscovered roles and targets.  We will use a combination of approaches including molecular, to cultured heart muscle cells, to intact hearts isolated from rats which have been given treatments to enhance oxidative stress.  We will determine if inhibiting MMP-2 will protect the cells and the hearts from cell injury and death resulting from oxidative stress.  The relevance of this research is that an entirely new class of inhibitor drugs which target MMP-2 may prove useful for the treatment of a broad range of cardiovascular diseases, as enhanced oxidative stress is common to many.",5 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=172596&lang=en
172599,How focal is focal epilepsy?,Kobayashi  Eliane,"Kobayashi, Eliane",Montreal Neurological Institute-Hospital,Qu&eacute;bec,Canada,200809,334395.0,Operating Grant,Operating Grants,Clinical,"Neurosciences, Mental Health and Addiction",Electroencephalography; Epilepsy; Magnetic Resonance Imaging; Magnetoencephalography; Neuroimaging; Neurophysiology,"In the investigation of patients with focal epilepsy, the main goal has been the localization of the brain region responsible for the seizures, the so-called epileptic focus. This is mainly driven by the search for a potential target for surgical treatment, aiming to render the patient seizure-free. However, focal epilepsy patients frequently show abnormalities beyond the presumed epileptic focus, and this evidence of 'extra-focus' abnormalities has been long overlooked. The reasons might be their unknown significance and the urge for localization. Many imaging and neurophysiology modalities have demonstrated the existence of these abnormalities that might be more than additional findings and should be further evaluated. Among the
unsolved questions, we need to understand their relationship with the epileptic activity and their clinical implication (relationship with progression of epilepsy and drug-resistance).",3 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=172599&lang=en
172609,Structure/function analysis of neurotransmitter exocytosis,Sugita  Shuzo,"Sugita, Shuzo",University Health Network (Toronto),Ontario,Canada,200809,444521.0,Operating Grant,Operating Grants,Biomedical,"Neurosciences, Mental Health and Addiction",Infection; Pc12 Cells; Rna Interference; Secretion Assay; Transfection,"Release of chemicals(transmitters) from secretory cells incluing neurons and neuroendocrine cells produces a wide variety of physiological effects. Many proteins are involved in this process. Among them we will focus on the two interacting proteins that are centrally involved in transmitter release, and study how this interaction controls the release of transmitters.",3 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=172609&lang=en
172621,Melanoma and neurofibromatosis: Genetic diseases linked by dark skinned mouse mutants,Van Raamsdonk  Catherine D,"Van Raamsdonk, Catherine D",University of British Columbia,British Columbia,Canada,200809,646986.0,Operating Grant,Operating Grants,Biomedical,Genetics,Developmental Biology; G Proteins; Genetics; Melanoma; Mouse; Neurofibromatosis,"Melanoma is a type of cancer that originates in the pigment cells of the skin. The number of melanoma cases in North America has more than doubled in the past 20 years and continues to rise. When not treated at an early stage of disease progression, melanoma patients often have a poor survival outcome, since metastatic melanoma is very aggressive. It is generally believed that cancer is caused when individual cells develop a series of changes in their DNA or genetic material. These changes allow them to escape normal growth restrictions. 

Our main goal is to understand how melanoma forms in people. We began this project by using mice to model the genetics of skin pigmentation. We focused on three genes that we found darkened the mouse skin when mutated: GNAQ, GNA11 and NF1. We have since identified a mutation in GNAQ in 46% of uveal melanomas, a cancer of the pigment cells in the uveal tract of the eye. GNAQ is the first oncogene identified in this type of cancer and suggests novel therapeutic strategies for its treatment. In this application, we propose to further study the role of GNAQ, GNA11 and NF1 in skin pigmentation and disease.",5 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=172621&lang=en
172623,Processing of proIAPP: Role in islet amyloid formation,Verchere  Bruce C,"Verchere, Bruce C",BC Children's Hospital Research Institute,British Columbia,Canada,200809,621784.0,Operating Grant,Operating Grants,Biomedical,"Nutrition, Metabolism and Diabetes",Amylin; Amyloid; Beta Cell; Cell Biology; Histology; Iapp,"Many people with type 2 diabetes must take insulin by injection because of the loss of insulin-producing cells, called islet beta cells, in their pancreas. It is thought that this loss of islet beta cells is due islet amyloid, a toxic accumulation of protein.

In order to better understand why protein builds up in people with type 2 diabetes, we propose to study the forms of a protein hormone called pro-islet amyloid polypeptide (proIAPP).

ProIAPP is made within the insulin-producing islet beta cells. When it is cut by enzymes, it becomes a smaller protein hormone called islet amyloid polypeptide (IAPP). Islet amyloid forms when, for unknown reasons, IAPP forms aggregates that kill the islet beta cells.

We believe that in type 2 diabetes, the process through which proIAPP is cut to form IAPP is defective, leading to an accumulation of incompletely cut forms of proIAPP, that then aggregate to form amyloid. 

We will study the forms of proIAPP in the blood of persons with type 2 diabetes and in mice that make excessive amounts of the protein hormone. Through this research, we hope to understand why islet amyloid occurs in people with type 2 diabetes. Our goal is to contribute to developing new therapies that may prevent this protein buildup and the resulting destruction of the pancreas' insulin producing cells.",5 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=172623&lang=en
172624,Action observation in people with Down syndrome,Hodges  Nicola J,"Hodges, Nicola J",University of British Columbia,British Columbia,Canada,200809,300000.0,CIHR New Investigator,Salary Programs,Social / Cultural / Environmental / Population Health,Population and Public Health,Demonstrations; Down Syndrome; Imitation; Motor Learning; Observational Learning; Skill Acquisition,"In British Columbia 2 in every 1000 births are of children with Down syndrome. This is a genetic disorder which results in an array of symptoms including mental and sensory-motor difficulties. People with Down syndrome are at high risk for obesity and cardiovascular disease as they age and inactivity is a significant risk factor. The acquisition of basic motor skills enables and motivates engagement in activities for life. This program of research is designed to fill a knowledge gap about the action-observation process in people with Down syndrome. The specific aim is to study how these people observe and attend to actions in others in order to facilitate the learning of physical skills. Surprisingly very little is know about how to effectively teach people with Down syndrome motor skills and the processes engaged during observation and motor learning. These individuals appear to learn well from demonstrations, in comparison to mental age matched controls, yet there is evidence from brain imaging studies that this process is different to typically developing individuals, not involving activation of motor-areas of the brain. Further, no one has systematically studied what information drives this observational learning process. During actual movement, there is evidence that people with Down syndrome have difficulties predicting the future effects of their action, in terms of how an action looks and feels. We do not know whether this difficulty extends to the observation process and hence this research will help answer this question through studies requiring the prediction of movement effects when watching others. We will use behavioural methods to study these questions, involving the measurement of responses to demonstrated actions, both in the short term and long-term learning of novel actions. This research will direct evidence-based interventions for the teaching of motor skills and help to promote engagement in physical activity among people with Down syndrome.",5 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=172624&lang=en
172631,Plasticity of inhibition in spinal sensory pathways,De Koninck  Yves,"De Koninck, Yves",Universit&eacute; Laval,Qu&eacute;bec,Canada,200809,1390916.0,Operating Grant,Operating Grants,Biomedical,"Neurosciences, Mental Health and Addiction",Behavioural Pharmacology; Cellular Imaging; Chronic Pain; Electrophysiology; Gaba / Glycine; Immunocytochemistry,"The nerve cells of the sensory portion of the spinal cord in humans and animals are responsible for the relay of pain related information from the body to the brain, leading to a perceived sensation. Injury to the nervous system can induce persistent changes in spinal cord function that cause pain and tenderness to develop and be maintained for very long periods (days to years) after healing. The present project aims at determining how inhibitory control of nerve cell function is regulated and how it is altered in the spinal cord under pathological conditions such as peripheral neuropathy. Understanding the long term alterations which take place in the spinal cord after injury is of critical importance to design treatments for the prevention and alleviation of chronic neuropathic pain syndromes such as postherpetic neuralgia, causalgia following damage to a major nerve, diabetic neuropathy, allodynia, hyperalgesia, and spontaneous or phantom limb pain.",5 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=172631&lang=en
172635,Computer Assisted Surgery of the Elbow,Johnson  James A,"Johnson, James A",Western University (Ontario),Ontario,Canada,200809,386369.0,Operating Grant,Operating Grants,Biomedical,Musculoskeletal Health and Arthritis,Biomechanics; Biomedical Engineering; Computer-Assisted Surgery,"Replacement of the fractured or diseased elbow with implants is becoming an increasingly popular treatment, with the intent to restore function and reduce disability and pain. However, failure to correctly align the implant to bone may result in detrimental changes in both the loading and motion characteristics of the joint, potentially leading to implant loosening and failure. It is logical to postulate that improved alignment of elbow implants may be enhanced via image and computer assisted technology. These techniques will also be applicable to ligament repairs and reconstruction, and fracture fixation. The objectives of this work are to optimize and validate image and computer assisted surgical techniques for surgery of the elbow, and to determine the efficacy of these procedures using comparative biomechanical tests. We anticipate that these advances in surgical technique will lead to improved outcomes in patients who have undergone ligament repairs and reconstructions, fracture fixation and joint replacements.",4 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=172635&lang=en
172640,Improved Screening Methods for CCR5-Antagonists Use by Ultra Deep Sequencing and Quantitative Population-Based Sequencing Techniques: Analyzes of the Phase III Human Clinical Trials of Maraviroc (08-09).,Harrigan  Richard P,"Harrigan, Richard P; Poon, Arthur F",B.C. Centre for Excellence in HIV/AIDS (Vancouver),British Columbia,Canada,200809,690659.0,Operating Grant: Industry-partnered Collaborative Research - Rx&amp;D partner,Operating Grants,Clinical,Infection and Immunity,,"The life-long nature of HAART and the ability of HIV to mutate rapidly have led to concerns about the determinants of treatment response and toxicity, as well as the development of drug resistance. It is important to develop novel classes of antiretroviral agents as well as to improve the accessibility to those agents for patients resistant to current regimens. Recently Health Canada approved a new antiretroviral drug from a novel class called CCR5 antagonists, which has offered new hope to patients who have become resistant to traditional HIV antiretroviral drugs. This new drug inhibits HIV-1 binding to one of its co-receptors, CCR5, thereby preventing viral entry into target cells. In order for CCR5 antagonists to be useful for patients, it must first be determined what type of co-receptor their virus uses (tropism). Currently, patients must be screened using a Phenotypic Assay (Trofile) which takes weeks to produce results and costs approximately $2000 per sample. We propose to develop a sequencing-based clinical assay that will have a direct positive impact on patients by reducing delays and expense for co-receptor tropism determination. We will use novel methods of analyzing genetic sequence data, as well as new ¿deep sequencing¿ technology, to predict HIV co-receptor tropism, with an expected 10-fold decrease in cost. We will also develop our own phenotypic assay to assist in the validation of our sequencing-based approach. With our proposed project, we can combine basic science and clinical information to provide a more efficient and more cost-effective screening assay. In addition, this proposal should also lead to significant improvements in monitoring HIV. The equipment purchased (primarily a Roche/454 Genome Sequencer FLX) will allow our laboratory to develop more sensitive HIV drug resistance assays for existing anti-HIV agents, as well as assays for the eventual resistance to the CCR5 antagonists.",3 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=172640&lang=en
172641,Canadian Cohort Obstructive Lung Disease (CanCOLD),Bourbeau  Jean,"Bourbeau, Jean; Tan, Wan",Research Institute of the McGill University Health Centre,Qu&eacute;bec,Canada,200809,427933.0,Operating Grant: Industry-partnered Collaborative Research - Rx&amp;D partner,Operating Grants,Clinical,Circulatory and Respiratory Health,Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease; Cohort Study; Copd; Prospective Longitudinal Study; Tissue Bank,"Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is the fourth leading cause of death in Canada. COPD is not just a disease of men, nor is it solely a disease in old age. Women have been underrepresented and early disease has not been studied. Underdiagnosis of COPD remains a significant problem, and it may indicate an unmet healthcare need. This can potentially results not only in a patient been misinformed, but can lead to incorrect management. 
Epidemiological research is needed to develop a framework to combat this major health problem, by better characterization of the population of men and women at risk and patients with early disease, by better understanding which factors modifiable through health interventions are related to health perception (health-related quality of life) and disease evolution.
This will be possible through a nationwide study, the Canadian Cohort Obstructive Lung disease (CanCOLD), a prospective longitudinal study. The CanCOLD study is built on the current ongoing prevalence nationwide study, the Canadian Obstructive Lung disease ""COLD"" study. 
The CanCOLD will be the first study to assess prevalence of disease across Canada and its consequence in men and women, and to evaluate a conceptual model of disease severity based on patient's health perception (health-related quality of life). Ultimately, this project will extend to a longitudinal follow up (5 years or beyond) and will allow to have a better understanding of the lifestyle risk factors, not only smoking but also diet, physical activity, and co morbid conditions. This will be a great asset to shift from management of a single risk factor (tobacco control) to total COPD risk management. The results of the study will greatly help to assist decision makers in developing policies to improve the diagnosis, the management of COPD and to optimize health care services use.",2 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=172641&lang=en
172642,Media Saturated Publics: Understanding News Media Roles in Engaging the Public Effectively,Abelson  Julia,"Abelson, Julia; Secko, David M",McMaster University,Ontario,Canada,200712,98500.0,"Needs, Gaps and Opportunities Assessments in Health Services and Policy",Operating Grants,Health systems / services,Health Services and Policy Research,Citizen Engagement; Health News Media; Media Impacts; Public Expectations,"The purpose of this project is to define our current knowledge and gaps, future goals and opportunities, and challenges to understanding the role of the news media in engaging the public effectively. Patients and publics live in an information saturated world dominated by the news media. Health news and other 'news-like' information are presumed to shape the perceptions, expectations and behaviours of patients and publics. Yet these effects are not clear. As scientific/medical research continues to push boundaries, affect our economy and generate issues that cross into politics, law and ethics, it is important to better understand the impact of health news and other 'news-like' information on patients and publics.

Understanding these impacts is a critical input to the design of effective mechanisms for engaging citizens in increasingly challenging public policy decisions such as the allocation of limited health care resources. 

To address this research priority, the project team will:
1) produce an environmental scan of current and planned research activity in the area of media impacts on patients and publics; 
2) undertake interactive consultations with relevant researchers, research users and media producers with interest and expertise in this area to identify critical knowledge gaps, needs and opportunities; and
3) prioritize these needs and opportunities through a structured deliberative consultation with key stakeholder partners.",1 yr 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=172642&lang=en
172644,"A National Needs, Gaps and Opportunities Assessment (NGOA) of Research Activities and Capacity Regarding Access to Rehabilitation Services Across the Continuum of Care",Landry  Michel D,"Landry, Michel D",University of Toronto,Ontario,Canada,200712,93198.0,"Needs, Gaps and Opportunities Assessments in Health Services and Policy",Operating Grants,Health systems / services,Health Services and Policy Research,Access; Environmental Scan; National Rehabilitation Research Agenda; Rehabilitation,"In Canada, rehabilitation services have emerged as an essential aspect of health service delivery across the continuum of care from institutional to home and community settings.  However, from a health services and policy perspective, these services are considered to be beyond the insurable limits of the CHA. As a result, rehabilitation services in Canada have been incrementally shifted towards the privately-funded sector, and are increasingly delivered by private for-profit providers.  As the shift from public to private funding continues, access to rehabilitation services tends to move from an entitlement.  The consequences of this shift are not fully understood, however it has been remarked that rehabilitation demand will increase over the next 20 years primarily due to factors such as the growth in the proportion of the country¿s population aged 65 years and older thereby creating a crisis in access to services when and where they are most needed.  The panorama of other factors that may drive an increased demand for rehabilitation services has not been well documented, and implications of perceived growing demand on access to services across the continuum has received little attention in ongoing health service or health policy debates.  In this multi-phased research study, we plan to conduct a national environmental scan of current and ¿works in progress¿ as it related to research in the area of access to rehabilitation services across the continuum of care from the community to the institutional sector.  We also plan to engage national stakeholders, and through a series of key informant interviews, translations workshop and web based surveys, generate a prioritize research agenda to address the needs, gaps and opportunities identified within the study.",1 yr 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=172644&lang=en
172648,"Primary Health Care Electronic Health Records: A National Study on Needs, Gaps, and Opportunities",Stewart  Moira A,"Stewart, Moira A; Terry, Amanda L; Thind, Amardeep",Western University (Ontario),Ontario,Canada,200712,99803.0,"Needs, Gaps and Opportunities Assessments in Health Services and Policy",Operating Grants,Health systems / services,Health Services and Policy Research,Electronic Health Records; Environmental Scan; Needs Assessment; Primary Health Care,"Despite an increased interest in primary health care (PHC) electronic health records (EHR) in Canada, levels of use are relatively low. Other countries, such as the United Kingdom and the Netherlands, have led the way in utilizing PHC EHRs. The proposed project will assess the current state, and future potential, of PHC EHR use for policy-making (including strategic planning and program implementation), clinical care, and research in Canada. Due to the importance of PHC to the health care system, and its connections with other sectors of the system, we focus on EHR use in PHC in this proposal. Primary health care is important to the health care system because of its role as the foundation of the system, as the entry point and connector to care, and the fact that there are many more patient visits per day in PHC compared to those in specialist care. Nonetheless, there is a gap in PHC EHR research in Canada. The Canada-wide research team assembled for the project will have two main tasks to address the project objectives: 1) conduct an environmental scan, and 2) implement a collaborative consultation process to identify goals for PHC EHR use, and create strategies to address these goals. This project will contribute to the realization of the full potential of PHC EHR use in Canada by identifying priority areas for improvement and change.",1 yr 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=172648&lang=en
172666,Towards Understanding the Consequences of Mild Bilateral and Unilateral Hearing Loss in Early Childhood,Fitzpatrick  Elizabeth,"Fitzpatrick, Elizabeth",University of Ottawa,Ontario,Canada,200809,300000.0,CIHR New Investigator,Salary Programs,Clinical,"Human Development, Child and Youth Health",Children; Developmental Outcomes; Mild Hearing Loss; Newborn Screening; Qualitative Research; Unilateral Hearing Loss,"Permanent hearing loss is one of the most common childhood disorders and interferes with the typical acquisition of speech and language and influences academic, social, and quality of life outcomes.  Several Canadian provinces and much of the world have implemented universal newborn hearing screening programs to identify hearing loss early so that children have a better start in life. About 30 to 40% of the children who may be identified through screening present with mild bilateral or unilateral hearing loss (one ear).   Prior to screening, the majority of these children were not identified until 4 to 6 years of age.  While studies have shown that late-identified hearing loss affects these children's behavior and abilities in school, the impact of hearing loss when it is identified very early in life is less clear. Therefore, there is considerable uncertainty amongst practitioners about the best ways to help children and their families.  This study will follow a group of early identified children over several years to identify the difficulties they are experiencing compared to a group of children with normal hearing. The study will measure children's progress in several areas and interview parents to elicit their perspective of their child's development.  In addition, we will examine the factors that may predict which children will have difficulty.   We will also try to determine what supports families need to care for their child with hearing loss in the early years.  This study will provide useful information for decision-making regarding the severity of hearing loss that should be targeted in newborn hearing screening programs and the interventions that might be appropriate for children with mild and unilateral hearing loss.",5 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=172666&lang=en
172674,Computational and structural studies of gene silencing mechanisms,Major  Fran&ccedil;ois,"Major, François",Universit&eacute; de Montr&eacute;al,Qu&eacute;bec,Canada,200809,576945.0,Operating Grant,Operating Grants,Biomedical,Genetics,Computational Modeling; Gene Expression Mechanisms And Pathways; Nmr; Physicochemical Properties; Structural And Genomic Data; X-Ray Crystallography,"Nature has developed mechanisms to protect living organisms against external intruders such as viruses, or internal dysfunction such as cancer. One such security mechanism is shutting down genes, also known as gene silencing. Gene silencing is at the heart of development and specialization. It has thus recently been widely used to study human and model organisms' genetics and development, and to create transgenic plants developing resistance to viruses. Increasing evidences suggest that diseases such as cancer are the result of multiple gene deregulations. A normal cellular reaction in front of such deregulations is shutting down these genes.  However, in the case of cancer for unknown reasons, the cell is unable to do so and tumors develop and progress. We need to understanding better gene silencing mechanisms if we wish to discover why the cell cannot defends itself against cancer, or if we want to intervene efficiently in gene silencing to fight cancer. Gene silencing is based on a class of ribonucleic acids called microRNAs. One of the aims of this research proposal is to study the molecular basis of these microRNAs, and in particular the binding mechanism by which they bind the messenger RNAs of targeted genes. Predicting accurately the targeted genes of microRNAs is among the most important unresolved questions of gene silencing at this moment. Dr. Major proposes the application of an RNA computer-modeling framework he developed over the last 20 years to obtain high-resolution 3-D structures of microRNAs as well as of their targeted messenger RNAs. These 3-D structures will help him get insights into how and where microRNAs bind their targets, and prepare biological assays to confirm these insights.",5 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=172674&lang=en
172688,The concurrent use of medications with opposing actions: the prevalence and impact of prescribing both anticholinergics and cholinesterase inhibitors to people with dementia,Gill  Sudeep S,"Gill, Sudeep S","Queen's University (Kingston, Ontario)",Ontario,Canada,200809,124555.0,Operating Grant,Operating Grants,Clinical,Aging,Administrative Health Care Databases; Adverse Drug Events; Clinical Pharmacology; Geriatrics; Nested Case-Control Study; Pharmacoepidemiology,"A wide variety of medications possess anticholinergic properties, meaning they block a chemical called acetylcholine in the body. The anticholinergic effects of these drugs can be especially concerning in older adults for several reasons. First, they can lead to acute urinary retention (the sudden, painful inability to void). Second, anticholinergic drugs can also interfere with memory and thinking, which is especially dangerous for older people with dementia. In fact, another group of drugs called the cholinesterase inhibitors, which are used to treat dementia, essentially have the opposite effect of anticholinergic drugs. Despite their opposing actions, anticholinergics and cholinesterase inhibitors are sometimes prescribed together. This practice may provoke serious adverse effects such as acute urinary retention and worsening confusion. We will find out how commonly these drugs with opposing actions are prescribed together, and whether this prescribing practice leads to safety problems in frail older adults with dementia. If we find evidence of harm, a policy to help alert physicians to the hazards of co-prescribing these drugs may help to limit this problem.",3 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=172688&lang=en
172704,Identification and processing of slipped-DNAs in patient tissues: Mutagenic Intermediates of Disease-Associated CAG/CTG Trinucleotide Repeat Instability,Pearson  Christopher E,"Pearson, Christopher E",Hospital for Sick Children (Toronto),Ontario,Canada,200809,962448.0,Operating Grant,Operating Grants,Biomedical,Genetics,Dna Mutation; Dna Repair; Dna Replication; Dna Structure; Genetic Instability; Genome Stability,"About 40 human diseases, including myotonic dystrophy, are inherited in a manner that the symptoms become worse down generations as well as worsening as the individual ages.  These diseases are caused by DNA mutations involving repeated DNA sequences.  If one considers a gene as though it were a sentence such as THE CAT ATE THE FAT FAT RAT, typical mutations would pose as spelling errors.  For instance THE GAT ATE THE FAT FAT RAT.  This mutation would be the same in all individuals in the family, all with the same symptoms.  However, in repeat-associated diseases the mutation would be THE CAT ATE THE FAT FAT FAT FAT FAT RAT, and their children would inherit a further mutation; THE CAT ATE THE FAT FAT FAT FAT FAT FAT FAT FAT RAT and have more severe disease than their parents.  These mutations also continue through the life of the patient; progressively making symptoms worse.  My research focuses on understanding this form of mutation with the long-term goal of being able to prevent or treat affected families.  Being able to arrest or reverse this repeat mutation (reducing or preventing the expansion of the number of ""FAT"" repeat units) presents a therapeutic pathway to reduce disease severity; a pathway whose elucidation will be facilitated by understanding of the mutation process. 

To understand this mutation we will focus on: 1) unusual DNA structures that form at the repeating units that are thought to be involved in the mutation; 2) mistakes during the process of DNA replication, which duplicates the DNA when making a new cell: and 3) DNA repair which repairs broken DNA and unusual DNA structures.  Mistakes during replication and repair are thought to cause the mutation of repeats in these diseases.  Our studies will decipher the mechanisms of this disease-causing mutation and will reveal candidate targets for research avenues aimed at therapeutic treatment by arresting or reversing the expansion mutations (FAT FAT FAT FAT FAT RAT.......down to......FAT FAT R",5 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=172704&lang=en
172708,Prediction of preeclampsia using an HLA-G gene single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP).,Librach  Clifford L,"Librach, Clifford L; Kingdom, John C","Sunnybrook Research Institute (Toronto, Ontario)",Ontario,Canada,200809,266337.0,Operating Grant,Operating Grants,Clinical,"Human Development, Child and Youth Health",Elisa; Hla-G; Mutation Testing; Placenta; Preeclampsia; Rna Stability,"Preeclampsia (PE) is a disease that affects 2-7% of all pregnant women and is one of the major causes of maternal and fetal morbidity and mortality throughout the world.   The underlying cause for this enigmatic disease is unknown.  Human leukocyte antigen G (HLA-G) is a molecule that is made by placental cells during pregnancy.  Much evidence, from our group and others, supports the notion that this molecule plays a critical role in protection of babies from a maternal immune response.  We have intriguing evidence suggesting that there is a mutation in the HLA-G gene associated with the development of preeclampsia.  The overall goal of this grant submission will be to study, in a prospective fashion, the predictive value of this HLA-G gene mutation for preeclampsia.   A predictive test for preeclampsia could allow obstetricians to be more vigilant when caring for pregnant women at high risk for this disease, by increasing surveillance, and it could potentially allow intervention before the development of more severe disease manifestations, that could be harmful for the mother and/or her baby.  Such a test could also allow us to design research studies to to study potential preventative therapies in those patients at higher risk for development of this condition.",3 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=172708&lang=en
172711,A Collaborative Quality Improvement Model and Electronic Community of Practice to Support Sepsis Management in Emergency Departments: Investigating Care Harmonization for Provincial Knowledge Translation.,Ho  Kendall,"Ho, Kendall; Jarvis-Selinger, Sandra; Marsden, John J",University of British Columbia,British Columbia,Canada,200809,283424.0,Operating Grant,Operating Grants,Social / Cultural / Environmental / Population Health,Health Services and Policy Research,Electronic Community Of Practice; Emergency Medicine; Knowledge Translation; Quality Improvement Model; Sepsis Management / Intervention,"Early and intensive clinical intervention of patients in emergency departments has been demonstrated by the literature to significantly improve the morbidity and mortality outcomes of patients with sepsis. Emergency medicine departments within several organizations are now advocating the adoption of early intervention guidelines for patients with the signs and symptoms of sepsis. This proposed research will lead to a comprehensive understanding of how diverse emergency department (ED) sites across British Columbia (BC) engage in a Quality Improvement Collaborative to lead to improvements in time-based process measures (e.g. time to antibiotics) and clinical outcomes (e.g. reduced morbidity and mortality rates) for septic (including severe sepsis and septic shock) patients in EDs.

Funding from the BC Ministry of Health (MoH) has led to the creation of a community (i.e. ED) driven and grassroots initiative, Evidence to Excellence (E2E), to address the challenge of translating the best evidence of sepsis management across BC emergency departments.  Improving sepsis management is one of the central foci chosen by the E2E initiative. CIHR funding for this proposed research will support the evaluation component of a sepsis management collaborative, which is currently not funded within the scope of in-kind funding provided by the MoH.

This research study will employ the IHI Collaborative model, incorporate the principles of participatory action research; and utilize an electronic CoP to engage emergency department practitioners (e.g. physicians, nurses, administrators, etc) from across B.C. to (i) share the evidence of early intervention in sepsis (e.g. exchanging ideas, engaging in discussions, sharing resources, amalgamating knowledge); (ii) adapt the evidence to their patterns of practice; (iii) develop a common set of orders for implementation of the sepsis pathway; and (iv) agree on common indicators to evaluate time-based process measures and clinical outcomes.",3 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=172711&lang=en
172724,Mechanism of the high-affinity ligand binding and selective ion permeation  in voltage-gated K-channels,Noskov  Sergei,"Noskov, Sergei",University of Calgary,Alberta,Canada,200809,300000.0,CIHR New Investigator,Salary Programs,Biomedical,Circulatory and Respiratory Health,Cardiac Potassium Channels; Membrane Pharmacology; Molecular Biophysics; Molecular Modeling,"This project is aimed towards better description of the molecular mechanism, which governs an inhibition of ion currents in  cardiac K-channels by the novel anti-arrhythmic and anti-convulsant drugs. Selective transport of potassium ions across  cellular membranes is a key component for the normal heart function. Theoretical simulations create a in silica model  systems that allows in silica mutagenesis. Insights from models will then be validated or refuted by in vitro expression of  native and mutated potassium channels followed by voltage clamp experiments. The information allows feedback refinement  of the 3d molecular structure of the channels. The projects will lead to understanding of mechanisms of how membrane  proteins select ions for their functional activity, of the mechanism of drug binding and block in different K+ channels, and 
structural determinants of cardiovascular diseases. Since inadvertent drug block is a major causes of Long QT Syndrome  and potentially lethal arrhythmias in humans this work is clinically relevant.",5 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=172724&lang=en
172731,"Structure, dynamics and contingency in signaling regulatory networks",Michnick  Stephen W,"Michnick, Stephen W",Universit&eacute; de Montr&eacute;al,Qu&eacute;bec,Canada,200809,861455.0,Operating Grant,Operating Grants,Biomedical,Genetics,Biochemical Regulatory Networks; Gene Regulatory Networks; Protein Kinases; Protein Phosphatases; Protein-Fragment Complementation Assays; Protein-Protein Interactions,"If you wanted to understand an electronic device like an iPod, you would likely look at the individual components, see how they are wired together and then figure out how individual and groups of components dynamically respond to inputs and what signal come out.  You'd start with individual components and then look at hierarchically more complex two, three or more component relationships.  Along the way, you'd make lists of motifs, groups of different components that behave the same way, to try to figure out the modular organization of the whole.  Can the same logic be applied to life?  In fact it can and extraordinary efforts are aimed at breaking down cellular processes in this way.  But it is an arduous task and some aspects, such as dynamics are not easy to study.  We have developed novel experimental strategies that allow us to both study the dynamics of regulatory circuits in cells involving genes and proteins and to dissect these circuits by disrupting, very specifically, the relationships between individual components.  Further, we can perform these analyses en-masse, allowing us to obtain enough information to see if life has come up with a definable set of motifs with unique properties. The central aim of our proposal is to build on evidence for simple three component motifs that have been characterized in a model of the eukaryotic cell, that of the bakers yeast, by identifying and characterizing the behavior of these motifs.  The advantage of working on yeast is that they share many genes with humans and most notably those that are most primordial and become dysfunctional with age and in diseases such as cancers.  As we discuss in the proposal, we have shown how certain types of cell regulation, are particularly vulnerable to disruption of certain genes. The results of our efforts may help us to more generally define how certain cell regulation is more vulnerable to dysfunction than others and what kinds of strategies could re-stabilize them.",5 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=172731&lang=en
172738,Development and validation of a lung cancer risk prediction model,Karp  Igor,"Karp, Igor",Universit&eacute; de Montr&eacute;al,Qu&eacute;bec,Canada,200809,300000.0,CIHR New Investigator,Salary Programs,Clinical,Population and Public Health,Case-Control Studies; Epidemiologic Research; Lung Cancer; Probability Functions; Risk Prediction; Screening,"The ability to assess an individual's risk of lung cancer can have important implications for public health, clinical medicine and for individual decision-making regarding lifestyle changes. We will develop and validate a series of inter-related statistical models that will enable accurate assessment of lung cancer risk on an individual and population level.

We will use the data from two case-control studies that have been carried out in Montreal by Dr Jack Siemiatycki. These studies were characterized by development of a unique methodology for assessment of various exposures based on detailed interviews with over 4000 lung cancer cases and age- and sex-matched population-based controls. Base on these data, advanced statistical methodology for studying the roles of smoking history and occupational and chemical factors has been developed by our team.

Based on the above-mentioned case-control data, we will develop multivariable statistical models. The set of candidate risk indicators (selected from the study database, comprising hundreds of variables) will include those representing tobacco smoking history (both first-hand and environmental), age, sex, occupational exposures (in particular, selected dusts and fumes), history of hay fever and respiratory illnesses (emphysema, chronic bronchitis), and some others. 

The models derived from this study can be applied to the scientific practice of lung cancer risk assessment, diagnosis, and prevention. At a community level they can be used to predict the numbers of cases of cancer that will arise, and thus be used for health services planning. For clinical purposes they can be used to triage people into screening programs.  For the subjects themselves, these models can also be used to motivate lifestyle changes or at least to inform them of the potential consequences of lifestyle changes.",5 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=172738&lang=en
172750,Towards Understanding the Consequences of Mild Bilateral and Unilateral Hearing Loss in Early Childhood,Fitzpatrick  Elizabeth,"Fitzpatrick, Elizabeth",University of Ottawa,Ontario,Canada,200809,593745.0,Operating Grant,Operating Grants,Clinical,"Human Development, Child and Youth Health",Children; Devlopmental Outcomes; Mild Hearing Loss; Newborn Screening; Qualitative Research; Unilateral Hearing Loss,"Permanent hearing loss is one of the most common childhood disorders and interferes with the typical acquisition of speech and language and influences academic, social, and quality of life outcomes.  Several Canadian provinces and much of the world have implemented universal newborn hearing screening programs to identify hearing loss early so that children have a better start in life. About 30 to 40% of the children who may be identified through screening present with mild bilateral or unilateral hearing loss (one ear).   Prior to screening, the majority of these children were not identified until 4 to 6 years of age.  While studies have shown that late-identified hearing loss affects these children's behavior and abilities in school, the impact of hearing loss when it is identified very early in life is less clear. Therefore, there is considerable uncertainty amongst practitioners about the best ways to help children and their families.  This study will follow a group of early identified children over several years to identify the difficulties they are experiencing compared to a group of children with normal hearing. The study will measure children's progress in several areas and interview parents to elicit their perspective of their child's development.  In addition, we will examine the factors that may predict which children will have difficulty.   We will also try to determine what supports families need to care for their child with hearing loss in the early years.  This study will provide useful information for decision-making regarding the severity of hearing loss that should be targeted in newborn hearing screening programs and the interventions that might be appropriate for children with mild and unilateral hearing loss.",5 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=172750&lang=en
172754,Patient and neuroimaging studies of mental state representations,Rosenbaum  Rachel S,"Rosenbaum, Rachel S","York University (Toronto, Ontario)",Ontario,Canada,200809,568445.0,Operating Grant,Operating Grants,Biomedical,"Neurosciences, Mental Health and Addiction",Autobiographical Memory; Frontal Lobes; Lesion Method; Neuroimaging; Temporal Lobes; Theory Of Mind,"There is little understanding of the brain regions and networks that support awareness of past and current mental states belonging to oneself and to other people. While brain damage may cause obvious deficits in cognitive abilities such as attention and language, it may also lead to subtler, yet equally devastating deficits, such as the inability to decipher other people's thoughts and feelings, what is known as 'theory of mind.' Our ability to cooperate, deceive, and empathize rests on theory of mind, which allows us to recognize in others a set of beliefs that might not correspond to our own beliefs. The loss of this ability can thus have enormous social consequences for patients and their families. The proposed research uses an innovative approach of combining the examination of theory of mind impairment following brain lesions, with functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI), a technique that allows visualization of on-line brain activity as participants perform various tasks. A first set of studies examines how damage to discrete regions of the frontal and temporal lobes can impair the ability to represent mental states on a wide range of tests known to be sensitive to theory of mind impairment. The relationship between theory of mind and remembering one's own past mental states during autobiographical memory, which draws on similar brain regions and processes, will then be investigated using a novel real-world 'family photos' test. Patients will be scanned with fMRI to explore differences in brain regions recruited as they recollect their own mental states while viewing personal photos of past experiences, and as they infer other people's current experiences when viewing strangers' photos. These studies will also help to reveal how damage to a region can affect the remaining network of regions. These findings could lead to new diagnostic tools and rehabilitation techniques to help individuals with brain injury lead emotionally and socially fulfilling lives.",5 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=172754&lang=en
172756,The concurrent use of medications with opposing actions: the prevalence and impact of prescribing both anticholinergics and cholinesterase inhibitors to people with dementia,Gill  Sudeep S,"Gill, Sudeep S","Queen's University (Kingston, Ontario)",Ontario,Canada,200809,300000.0,CIHR New Investigator,Salary Programs,Clinical,Aging,Administrative Health Care Databases; Adverse Drug Events; Clinical Pharmacology; Geriatrics; Nested Case-Control Study; Pharmacoepidemiology,"A wide variety of medications possess anticholinergic properties, meaning they block a chemical called acetylcholine in the body. The anticholinergic effects of these drugs can be especially concerning in older adults for several reasons. First, they can lead to acute urinary retention (the sudden, painful inability to void). Second, anticholinergic drugs can also interfere with memory and thinking, which is especially dangerous for older people with dementia. In fact, another group of drugs called the cholinesterase inhibitors, which are used to treat dementia, essentially have the opposite effect of anticholinergic drugs. Despite their opposing actions, anticholinergics and cholinesterase inhibitors are sometimes prescribed together. This practice may provoke serious adverse effects such as acute urinary retention and worsening confusion. We will find out how commonly these drugs with opposing actions are prescribed together, and whether this prescribing practice leads to safety problems in frail older adults with dementia. If we find evidence of harm, a policy to help alert physicians to the hazards of co-prescribing these drugs may help to limit this problem.",5 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=172756&lang=en
172762,Transcript-mediated epigenetic regulation in the germ line of the nematode Caenorhabditis elegans,Spence  Andrew M,"Spence, Andrew M",University of Toronto,Ontario,Canada,200809,379244.0,Operating Grant,Operating Grants,Biomedical,Genetics,C. Elegans; Cell Fate; Development; Differentiation; Epigenetics; Genetics,"During the development of any animal, cells communicate with each other. Animals as distantly related as worms, flies, and
mammals use many of the same mechanisms of cell to cell communication to control diverse aspects of their development.
Disruption of these paths of communication can result in serious birth defects or cancer. Studying development in a simple
animal like the roundworm C. elegans allows a detailed understanding of the signaling pathways that control development to
be achieved through the application of powerful genetic and molecular tools. We study a signaling pathway that regulates
one aspect of development, sex determination, in C. elegans. Some elements of this pathway are common to the worm and
more complicated animals, including humans. Studying sex determination in C. elegans will help us to understand how
these shared regulators work, and it can reveal new kinds of regulation. We have evidence for a new type of regulation in the
C. elegans germ line, which is, as in other animals, the tissue that contributes to the next generation. Our results suggest the existence of a mechanism that prevents a gene from being expressed in the C. elegans germ line unless that gene was previously expressed in the germ line of the mother. Regulation of this type may be of general importance in safeguarding the integrity of the germ line, and we are interested in determining how it works and how general it is.",3 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=172762&lang=en
172793,Deciphering the cis-regulatory code of Drosophila mRNA regulation using integrative computational and biochemical genomic analyses.,Morris  Quaid D,"Morris, Quaid D",University of Toronto,Ontario,Canada,200809,556685.0,Operating Grant,Operating Grants,Biomedical,Genetics,Computational Biology; Machine Learning; Mrna Processing; Pattern Recognition; Protein Binding Microarrays; Rna-Binding Proteins,"The messages from our genome that direct cellular function are encoded in RNA.  These messages (called mRNA) not only contain instructions on how to build a specific protein but also instructions on where, when, and how many copies of that protein to build.  Though we already know the genetic code that describes how to translate the RNA message into its associated protein product, we still do not know how to read the other instructions, those that regulate the production of the protein, encoded in the mRNA.

Deciphering the RNA regulation code is important.  Many inherited diseases appear to be caused by genetic mutations in RNA regulatory instructions.  Furthermore, knowing the RNA regulation code may provide us with new strategies for treating disease by targeting aspects of mRNA regulation.

We propose to decipher this regulation code in two steps.  First, we will learn the ""words"" of the code by analyzing the binding preferences of the regulatory proteins that bind to mRNA.  Then, we will decipher the ""grammar"" of the code by using computer algorithms that learn to predict the localization and stability of an mRNA based on the sequence of code words it contains.  We will validate our predictions by manipulating what we believe to be the regulatory instructions in particular mRNAs, and ensure that our predictions on how the regulation changes match reality.

We will carry out this research in fruit flies (Drosophila) because the regulatory code is likely to be similar between fruit flies and human, but there is readily available data on mRNA regulation in fruit flies that is unavailable in humans.",3 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=172793&lang=en
172797,"The effects of C-type natriuretic peptide and its receptors on sinoatrial node function, heart rate regulation and arrhythmogenesis",Rose  Robert A,"Rose, Robert A",Dalhousie University (Nova Scotia),Nova Scotia,Canada,200809,300000.0,CIHR New Investigator,Salary Programs,Biomedical,Circulatory and Respiratory Health,Arrhythmias; Electrophysiology; Heart Rate; Natriuretic Peptide; Sinoatrial Node; Transgenics,"Natriuretic peptides are a family of related hormones produced in the heart that are very important in the context of normal heart function and heart disease. Heart rate (the number of times the heart beats per minute) regulates the delivery of blood to all regions of the body and is determined by specialized 'pacemaker' cells in a region of the heart called the sinoatrial node. My lab is interested in how natriuretic peptides regulate the specialized sinoatrial node region of the heart. Since we began studying this topic we have found that one kind of natriuretic peptide, called CNP, can potently reduce heart rate by binding to a specific receptor called the natriuretic peptide C receptor (or NPR-C). Originally, scientists thought this NPR-C receptor had no function, but our work is helping to change this idea. Many more experiments are necessary to understand how CNP and the NPR-C receptor affect heart rate and the sinoatrial node. CNP also binds to a second kind of receptor called NPR-B. Very little is known about the role of the NPR-B receptor in the sinoatrial node; therefore, we are also studying this receptor so that we may ultimately understand how both NPR-C and NPR-B contribute to heart rate regulation by CNP. This work is important because heart failure is characterized by the occurrence of life threatening arrhythmias, some of which are associated with dysfunction of the sinoatrial node. The body increases its production of natriuretic peptides in heart disease because these peptides help prevent heart failure from worsening over time. We hypothesize that natriuretic peptides will be effective in treating or preventing arrhythmias during heart failure in people and believe our work will help lead to significant improvements in the use and development of synthetic natriuretic peptides for the treatment of people suffering from heart failure, arrhythmias and other forms of heart disease.",5 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=172797&lang=en
172812,"The effects of C-type natriuretic peptide and its receptors on sinoatrial node function, heart rate regulation and arrhythmogenesis",Rose  Robert A,"Rose, Robert A",Dalhousie University (Nova Scotia),Nova Scotia,Canada,200809,551889.0,Operating Grant,Operating Grants,Biomedical,Circulatory and Respiratory Health,Arrhythmias; Electrophysiology; Heart Rate; Natriuretic Peptide; Sinoatrial Node; Transgenics,"Natriuretic peptides are a family of related hormones produced in the heart that are very important in the context of normal heart function and heart disease. Heart rate (the number of times the heart beats per minute) regulates the delivery of blood to all regions of the body and is determined by specialized 'pacemaker' cells in a region of the heart called the sinoatrial node. My lab is interested in how natriuretic peptides regulate the specialized sinoatrial node region of the heart. Since we began studying this topic we have found that one kind of natriuretic peptide, called CNP, can potently reduce heart rate by binding to a specific receptor called the natriuretic peptide C receptor (or NPR-C). Originally, scientists thought this NPR-C receptor had no function, but our work is helping to change this idea. Many more experiments are necessary to understand how CNP and the NPR-C receptor affect heart rate and the sinoatrial node. CNP also binds to a second kind of receptor called NPR-B. Very little is known about the role of the NPR-B receptor in the sinoatrial node; therefore, we are also studying this receptor so that we may ultimately understand how both NPR-C and NPR-B contribute to heart rate regulation by CNP. This work is important because heart failure is characterized by the occurrence of life threatening arrhythmias, some of which are associated with dysfunction of the sinoatrial node. The body increases its production of natriuretic peptides in heart disease because these peptides help prevent heart failure from worsening over time. We hypothesize that natriuretic peptides will be effective in treating or preventing arrhythmias during heart failure in people and believe our work will help lead to significant improvements in the use and development of synthetic natriuretic peptides for the treatment of people suffering from heart failure, arrhythmias and other forms of heart disease.",5 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=172812&lang=en
172816,Metabolic regulation by a network centered on a conserved Mediator subunit,Taubert  Stefan,"Taubert, Stefan",University of British Columbia,British Columbia,Canada,200809,763635.0,Operating Grant,Operating Grants,Biomedical,"Nutrition, Metabolism and Diabetes",Gene Expression/ Transcription; Genetics Of Regulatory Networks; Lipid Metabolism; Stress Response / Detoxification,"Like all organisms, humans must adapt to changing conditions. Failure to do so can cause health problems; for example, inappropriate responses to food intake can cause diabetes and obesity, which are global health concerns today. These metabolic diseases are caused by a myriad of genetic and environmental factors. Accordingly, the pathways that assure normal metabolism are very complex. Fortunately, such mechanisms are conserved in lower animals to a significant extent. Thus, I want to exploit the genetically tractable roundworm Caenorhabditis elegans to discover and characterize new regulators that control lipid biology and the response to nutrition-related stresses. I will focus on a protein, called MDT-15, which plays a key role in the regulation of these processes. Importantly, this protein has a relative in humans, so I can potentially learn about human metabolic regulation by studying a model organism. In summary, I shall identify and characterize new genes and pathways that contribute to human (metabolic) disease. This work will add significantly to our knowledgebase of pathways regulating metabolism, and - in the long term - may aid the development of new preventative and/or therapeutic strategies.",5 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=172816&lang=en
172822,Role of Endoglin in Cardiovascular Development,Puri  Mira C,"Puri, Mira C","Sunnybrook Research Institute (Toronto, Ontario)",Ontario,Canada,200809,329056.0,Operating Grant,Operating Grants,Biomedical,Circulatory and Respiratory Health,Atrioventricular Canal; Cardiac Development; Conditional Mutagenesis; Endocardial Cushion,"A clear understanding of congenital heart disease requires knowledge of the origins and interconnections between all of the cell types that contribute to the heart and support its formation during fetal development. The cells that form the heart communicate through molecules known as receptors that receive and interpret biochemical messages. We have characterized the receptor Endoglin which is found on endothelial cells: the inner lining of all blood vessels and the heart. Our previous studies showed that Endoglin is required for formation of cellular structures known as endocardial cushions that partition the early embryonic heart tube into chambers, and which become the valves that regulate blood flow in the pumping heart. In this application we propose to determine the biochemical pathway used by Endoglin in the heart, and the effects Endoglin has on cellular processes such as migration or cell division in this context.  We will accomplish this by engineering genetic changes in mice such that Endoglin can be inactivated in a cell type, and time dependent manner. Our studies will advance our understanding of the process of valve formation in normal and abnormal heart development.",3 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=172822&lang=en
172829,Genetic Epidemiology of Osteoporotic Fractures; From Susceptibility Genes to Susceptible Populations,Richards  Brent,"Richards, Brent",CIUSSS de Centre-Ouest-de-l'Ile-de-Montr&eacute;al-Jewish General,Qu&eacute;bec,Canada,200809,273698.0,Operating Grant,Operating Grants,Clinical,Population and Public Health,Aging; Fracture; Genetic Epidemiology; Human Genetics; Osteoporosis,"Osteoporotic fractures are a common and debilitating problem, which are strongly influenced by our genes. Although many environmentally determined risk factors for osteoporotic fractures have been identified, they are lacking in their ability to identify individuals at risk for fractures and furthermore, the genetic determinants of osteoporotic fractures are largely unknown. We propose to develop a resource of DNA samples of individuals who have experienced osteoporotic fractures to enable the identification of the pathways involved in susceptibility to osteoporotic fractures. We will then employ emerging technologies, in cooperation with international collaborators, to identify which genes predispose to such fractures; thus enabling the development of new therapies and targeting of preventive therapies to those at highest risk. Because the risks we are identifying are genetic, we hope to employ safe and practical interventions in persons who are at risk years before osteoporosis develops.",2 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=172829&lang=en
172832,The role of IMP3 in pancreatic cancer progression and chemoresistance,Ng  Sylvia,"Ng, Sylvia",University of British Columbia,British Columbia,Canada,200809,367857.0,Operating Grant,Operating Grants,Biomedical,Cancer Research,Chemotherapy Resistance; Insulin-Like Growth Factor Signaling; Pancreatic Cancer; Primary Orthotopic Xenografts; Therapeutic Target; Tumor Progression,"Pancreatic cancer is the most deadly solid organ tumor with a typical life expectancy of 3-6 months after diagnosis.  Prognosis is poor because this malignancy is often detected too late for surgery to be helpful and is unresponsive to current chemotherapy and radiation therapy.  Combination treatment regimens using newly available drugs plus chemotherapy that have been shown to prolong survival in other cancers are not effective in pancreatic cancer.  Thus, there is a dire need to understand why pancreatic cancer progresses so rapidly, and why it is unresponsive to chemotherapy.  We recently observed very high levels of a molecule called insulin-like growth factor-2 mRNA binding protein 3 (IMP3) in pancreatic cancer tissues from 128 patients but not in normal pancreas tissues.  This observation leads us to think that IMP3 may be important in promoting pancreatic cancer growth, metastasis, and chemotherapy resistance.  The high level expression of IMP3 in only cancer but not in normal tissues also makes it a potential drug target.  Our research proposal will first use molecular biology methods to study the function of IMP3 in pancreatic cancer.  We will then use non-invasive imaging technologies to determine whether reducing the levels of IMP3 suppresses pancreatic cancer growth and/or renders pancreatic cancer responsive to chemotherapy again.  Positive findings from our research will lead to the development of more effective therapeutic strategies for pancreatic cancer to be tested in clinical trials.",3 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=172832&lang=en
172887,Pan-Canadian Decision-Making Support Network for Pandemic Preparedness,Pourbohloul  Babak,"Pourbohloul, Babak",University of British Columbia,British Columbia,Canada,200810,100000.0,Catalyst Grant: Pandemic Preparedness,Operating Grants,Social / Cultural / Environmental / Population Health,Infection and Immunity,Contact Network Epidemiology; Influenza; Mathematical Models; Pandemic Preparedness; Predictive Tools; Transmission Dynamics,"The emergence of new and reoccurring infectious diseases has been met with an abundance of preemptive 
scientific research to prepare for a pandemic. However, for Canada to further advance in this field, the 
research community must come together as a whole to tactically share resources and knowledge while 
preventing duplication between disciplines. 

Instigated by the explicit need to develop predictive and integrated pandemic preparedness plans, 
collaboration began between a unique, multidisciplinary group of pandemic preparedness experts from 
across Canadian. Collectively this group is referred to as the Canadian Consortium for Pandemic 
Preparedness Modeling/Consortium Canadien de modélisation pour la preparation du plan pandémie (with 
CanPan as an abbreviation used in both official languages).

CanPan's collective objective is to gather public health expertise from across Canada and use real time 
demographic and surveillance data to design studies, conduct research and produce valuable tool kits. This 
infrastructure will enable timely identification of optimal prevention and control strategies for infectious 
disease outbreaks for public health policy makers. Recommendations will also be provided to public and 
private business sectors to ensure business continuity during a pandemic.

Together these researchers and specialists will develop risk assessment frameworks that incorporate real 
time data into novel mathematical modeling and surveillance tools to investigate, address and control 
infectious disease outbreaks.",1 yr 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=172887&lang=en
172888,Burden of Influenza And Its Prevention In Pregnancy,Skowronski  Danuta Maria,"Skowronski, Danuta Maria; Bujold, Emmanuel; De Serres, Gaston",University of British Columbia,British Columbia,Canada,200810,100000.0,Catalyst Grant: Pandemic Preparedness,Operating Grants,Health systems / services,Infection and Immunity,Death; Hospitalization; Influenza; Pregnancy; Surveillance; Vaccine,"Pregnant women are considered to be at high risk for serious influenza outcomes, namely winter hospitalization.  Pregnant women have experienced higher rates of death during some - but not all - previous pandemics, especially the pandemic of 1918.  The National Advisory Committee on Immunizations (NACI) recommends that all pregnant women receive influenza vaccine.  There is a need for more information on the impact and prevention of influenza in pregnancy and for setting up systems to allow monitoring and comparison during a pandemic.   We propose a surveillance network to better understand the risk of serious outcomes due to influenza in pregnant women and to help assess influenza vaccine uptake and its protection in pregnancy.",1 yr 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=172888&lang=en
172893,Neural Processes Underlying Action Valuation,Dorris  Michael C,"Dorris, Michael C","Queen's University (Kingston, Ontario)",Ontario,Canada,200809,545485.0,Operating Grant,Operating Grants,Biomedical,"Neurosciences, Mental Health and Addiction",Decision-Making; Electrical Microstimulation; Frontal Cortex; Non-Human Primate; Probability; Reward,"We make thousands of decisions every day. Scientists have been quite successful in studying the brain processes underlying simple decisions such as navigating a traffic light, in which sensory cues indicate the correct choice. However, in many situations we must decide in the face of uncertain outcomes. For example, we must weigh the risks and rewards with the probability of each outcome when deciding on a proper medical treatment (e.g., chemotherapy treatment or surgical removal of a tumour). My research attempts to uncover how these different factors are represented in the brain and the rules by which they are combined to guide behaviour. One goal is to understand at the biological level the reasons normal individuals make appropriate and inappropriate decisions. Moreover, certain clinical populations such as pathological gamblers, obsessive-compulsives and substance abusers routinely make poor decisions that have more severe effects on their own well-being and on society at large. A second goal is to identify the differences in brain processing that underlie normal and pathological decision-making which is a critical step towards proper diagnosis and therapeutic intervention.",5 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=172893&lang=en
172894,Determining genomic subytpes of tetralogy of Fallot,Silversides  Candice,"Silversides, Candice; Bassett, Anne S",University Health Network (Toronto),Ontario,Canada,200809,337062.0,Operating Grant,Operating Grants,Clinical,Circulatory and Respiratory Health,Adult Congenital Heart Disease; Behavioral Science; Genetics,"Tetralogy of Fallot (TOF) is a common form of congenital heart disease found in adulthood.  In most cases the genes responsible for this cardiac defect are unknown.  We have identified a subgroup of patients with tetralogy of Fallot who appear to have a genetic syndrome, with both cardiac and non-cardiac features.  The objective of this study is to examine the clinical and genetic characteristics in this group of patients, and compare them to other patients with similar cardiac features but who do not have non-cardiac features.  Understanding the clinical and genetic characteristics in this subgroup of patients with TOF will help physicians to better counsel patients about the origins of the cardiac disease, their clinical outcomes and the risk of transmission to offspring. Improved knowledge about the genetics of tetralogy of Fallot and related congenital heart disease will help us better understand heart development.",3 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=172894&lang=en
172895,Involvement of p53 in replicative senescence,Benchimol  Samuel,"Benchimol, Samuel","York University (Toronto, Ontario)",Ontario,Canada,200809,351846.0,Operating Grant,Operating Grants,Biomedical,Aging,Cellular Aging; Dna Damage; Progeria; Senescence; Telomeres,"Normal human cells explanted from human tissues grow under experimental conditions in the laboratory for a defined number of cell divisions and then irreversibly stop dividing.  This is known as replicative senescence.  Although controversial, there is accumulating evidence that cellular senescence and organismal aging are related, namely that senescent cells accumulate as we age.  Replicative senescence is a property of most human cells and is thought to provide a natural barrier against the accumulation of the multiple mutations that lead to tumour development.  p53 plays a critical role in signalling cells to enter senescence; in the absence of p53, this barrier is lost and human cells can grow for an extended period during which they undergo further changes leading to genetic instability and cancer.  

Cells from patients with the premature aging disease Hutchinson-Gilford progeria syndrome (HGPS) undergo premature senescence when grown in culture.  This too seems to be dependent on p53.  The genetic defect that causes HGPS is known (a mutation in the lamin A gene).  We want to understand how p53 becomes activated to induce replicative senescence in normal cells and in response to defective lamin A in HGPS cells.   Our work has implications in the area of aging and cancer.",3 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=172895&lang=en
172908,Bidirectional cell signaling networks that control cell movement and segregation.,Pawson  Anthony J,"Pawson, Anthony J",Lunenfeld-Tanenbaum Research Institute  (Toronto),Ontario,Canada,200809,878400.0,Operating Grant,Operating Grants,Biomedical,Cancer Research,Bidirectional Cell Signaling; Cell Sorting; Eph Receptors And Ephrins; Protein-Protein Interactions; Proteomics/Mass Spectrometry; Tyrosine Kinases,"Communication between cells in the human body is essential for the formation, maintenance and functions of tissues. Conversely, diseases such as cancer result from aberrant signaling, that results in inappropriate cell growth and migration. In normal tissues, cellular communication is a two-way process, such that different cell types signal back and forth. A striking example involves two types of transmembrane proteins found on the surfaces of distinct cells, termed Eph receptors and ephrins. These proteins contact one another, and by transmitting molecular information into both cell types drive a sorting process, such that Eph receptor- and ephrin-expressing cells segregate into two spatially distinct populations. This type of bidirectional cell signaling is also important in disease tissues, such as cancers, in which the tumour and surrounding stromal cells exchange signals in a reciprocal fashion to support the growth of the tumour. We have developed a novel biochemical technique that allows us, for the first time, to directly analyze bidirectional signaling when different cells types are cultured together, for example cells expressing Eph receptors or ephrins. We will couple this proteomic approach with a functional analysis of proteins required for cell sorting, and use computational and experimental tools to define the network of signaling proteins that allows bidirectional signaling between Eph receptor- and ephrin-expressing cells to mediate cell segregation. We will then apply this approach to other sets of cells undergoing reciprocal signaling, including tumour and stromal cells.",5 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=172908&lang=en
172911,Targeting hyperapoB vs normoapoB to reduce the risk of type 2 diabetes in obese subjects; mechanism of action,Faraj  May,"Faraj, May",Universit&eacute; de Montr&eacute;al,Qu&eacute;bec,Canada,200809,404974.0,Operating Grant,Operating Grants,Clinical,"Nutrition, Metabolism and Diabetes",24 Weeks Hypocaloric Diet Intervention; Blood & Adipose Tissue); Fatty Acid Trapping (In Vivo & Ex Vivo In Adipose Tissue); Inflammation (In Vivo & Ex Vivo; Insulin Sensitivity (In Vivo & Ex Vivo In Adipose Tissue); Lipids & Apob-Lipoproteins (Size; Number & Oxidation); Obese Subjects With High Versus Low Serum Apob100,"Background: Type 2 diabetes results in the yearly death of ~ 40,000 Canadians. Some obese subjects have higher risk to develop diabetes and my research will examine why. The risk for type 2 diabetes in obese subjects increases when the body is resistance to the action of insulin hormone (i.e. reduced insulin sensitivity) which leads to increased blood sugar and diabetes. I believe that insulin resistance is promoted by elevated numbers of the atherogenic particles that carries cholesterol in the blood (like LDL). Accordingly obese subjects with elevated particle numbers (termed hyperapoB) have higher risk for developing type 2 diabetes than those with normal particle numbers (termed normal apoB).  

Methods: I will recruit 96 obese subjects without diabetes or chronic disease (>45 years, 50%men, 50%postmenopausal women). Subjects with hyperapoB will be compared to subjects with normal apoB and equivalent cholesterol concentrations (48 subjects/ group) at 1) baseline and 2) following 6-months hypocaloric-diet intervention to reduce weight by 10%. Mechanisms examined to explain the differences in insulin sensitivity between the 2 groups will be; rate of dietary fat storage, inflammation in the blood and fat tissue, blood atherogenic particles profile and fat tissue genes that affect metabolism.  

Hypotheses: I hypothesize that compared to subjects with normal apoB, obese subjects with hyperapoB have 1) lower insulin sensitivity at baseline due to a slower rate of fat storage and higher inflammation, 2) greater increase in insulin sensitivity after weight loss due to a greater decrease in atherogenic particles' numbers and inflammation and a greater increase in the rate of fat storage.    

Significance: My study will identify obese subjects with hyperapoB as a high-risk group for the development of type 2 diabetes and will demonstrate that targeted treatment of these subjects may aid in reducing the risk of type 2 diabetes among the obese population.",3 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=172911&lang=en
172913,Molecular mechanisms of endocrine disruptor action in Leydig cells,Tremblay  Jacques J,"Tremblay, Jacques J",Universit&eacute; Laval,Qu&eacute;bec,Canada,200809,495308.0,Operating Grant,Operating Grants,Biomedical,Gender and Health,Antagonism; Cryptorchidism; Endocrine Disruptors; Environment; Gene Expression; Promoter Analysis,"Proper positioning of the testes within the scrotum constitutes an essential step of the male sex differentiation process.  Testicular descent is a hormonally-regulated biphasic process that occurs during fetal life. Two hormones are involved, both secreted by testicular Leydig cells: INSL3 regulates the first phase while the second phase is dependent on testosterone. Failure of testicular descent is called cryptorchidism. The incidence of cryptorchidism has been steadily rising in the past decades and it is the most prevalent pediatric disorder affecting around 5% of full-term boys. If not adequately treated, cryptorchidism leads to impaired spermatogenesis and increased prevalence of testicular cancer. Although the exact causes of cryptorchidism remain poorly understood, recent studies have revealed that maternal exposure during pregnancy to excess estrogens (medication, obesity since fat tissue is an important source of estrogens) and to phthalates (an endocrine disrupting chemical used as plasticizer in cosmetics, nail polish, toys, tubing and bags used in hospitals, etc) increases the risk to give birth to cryptorchid boys. Using animal models, it was shown that estrogens and phthalates decrease expression of INSL3 in testicular Leydig cells thus causing cryptorchidism. Therefore the goal of the present project is to understand how certain endocrine disruptors found in our everyday life negatively impact expression INSL3 in Leydig cells leading to impaired testicular descent. Understanding this process will provide important new insights into the molecular mechanisms of estrogen- and phthalate-induced cryptorchidism and LC dysfunction and hopefully will allow for the development of new therapeutic and/or preventive measures.",4 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=172913&lang=en
172914,Protein interaction domains and adaptor proteins in cell signaling.,Pawson  Anthony J,"Pawson, Anthony J",Lunenfeld-Tanenbaum Research Institute  (Toronto),Ontario,Canada,200809,1302700.0,Operating Grant,Operating Grants,Biomedical,Genetics,Docking And Adaptor Proteins; Mouse Genetics; Neural Development; Phosphotyrosine Signaling; Protein Signaling Domains; Protein-Protein Interactions,"The functions of cells in the human body are largely organized by proteins, and the great majority of therapeutic drugs are targeted to proteins. Most human proteins are themselves constructed in a cassette-like fashion, from building blocks termed domains. One key function of such domains is to allow proteins to interact with one another, to form functional networks that allow the cell to respond to signals from its environment. Defects in these domain-based protein-protein interactions can underlie diseases, such as cancer and diabetes. To understand how human proteins work, and the defects characteristic of disease, we need to understand the properties of their constituent domains, both with respect to their biochemistry and their functions in the intact organism. In this project, we will investigate the properties of specific domains, and the proteins in which they reside, to understand more about how the body normally works, and what goes awry in disease states. Our work will focus on a so-called adaptor protein termed Grb2, and enzymes that add phosphate groups onto the amino acid tyrosine, one of the key regulatory devices used in normal and cancer cells.",5 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=172914&lang=en
172917,"Endovascular repair of abdominal aortic aneurysm: Enhanced planning, guidance and assessment by 2D/3D registration of fluoroscopic, CT, C-arm CT and virtual stent data",Soulez  Gilles,"Soulez, Gilles; Kauffmann, Claude",H&ocirc;pital Notre-Dame (Montr&eacute;al),Qu&eacute;bec,Canada,200809,120845.0,Operating Grant: Industry-partnered Collaborative Research - Other Partner,Operating Grants,Clinical,Circulatory and Respiratory Health,Abdominal Aortic Aneurysm; C-Arm Ct; Ct-Scan; Digital Substraction Angiography; Endovascular Repair By Stent-Graft; Image Fusion And Registration,"An increasing incidence of abdominal aortic aneurysms (AAA) is observed in our ageing  population. Since it is less invasive, endovascular repair (EVAR) by stent-graft (SG) insertion is frequently indicated in patients with intermediate and high-operative risk. Patient selection and stent planning for EVAR is done on contrast-enhanced CT-scans based on specific anatomic criteria. Since SG implantation are performed under digital substraction angiography (DSA) and fluoroscopic guidance, no soft-tissue differentiation is available during the intervention and important information are lacking such as thrombus and aneurysm extension close to proximal and distal landing zones. More recently, complex EVAR procedures involving preservation of renal or digestive arteries by SG fenestration (fenestrated SG) or internal iliac arteries (branched iliac SG) are performed. Accurate deployment of these devices are particularly challenging under fluoroscopy. Enhanced visualization combining fluoroscopy, DSA and CT-scan data could tremendously shorten procedure time. Our team have recently patented and validated a software allowing a semi-automated 3D segmentation of AAA (lumen and thrombus). More recently, catheterization laboratories are equipped with flat panel detectors allowing to combine DSA and C-arm CT acquisitions. The objectives of this study are to:  1. Develop an integrated software allowing registration of preoperative CT-scanner with per-operative C-arm CT using our segmentation algorithm. 2. Merge these two data set with a correction process to compensate for the deformation of the AAA induced by  the SG delivery system 3. Register this merged CT-data set with DSA and fluoroscopy to improve visualization during SG delivery.
This study will be conducted in partnership with Object Research System (ORS), a small Canadian company specialized in  the visualization and analysis of 3D/4D medical imaging datasets in collaboration with Siemens Medical.",3 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=172917&lang=en
172919,Regulation of Antiretroviral Drug Transport in the Brain,Bendayan  Reina,"Bendayan, Reina",University of Toronto,Ontario,Canada,200809,485743.0,Operating Grant,Operating Grants,Biomedical,"Neurosciences, Mental Health and Addiction",Aids; Astrocytes; Biochemical Studies; Brain; Breast Cancer Resistance Protein; Cell Culture; Drug; Endothelial Microvessel Cells; Hiv( Human Immunodeficiency Virus Infection); Microglia; Morphology And Immunocytochemistry; Multidrug Resistance Proteins; Orphan Nuclear Receptors; P-Glycoprotein; Rt-Pcr Analysis; Transport; Transport Studies,"In the brain, Human Immunodeficiency Virus (HIV) infects primarily the immune cells called microglia, and to a lesser extent, the supporting cells called astrocytes.  It is well established that antiretroviral drugs are not as  effective in the treatment of HIV-1 infection of the brain and equally well established that the brain concentrations of antiretroviral drugs are much less than those seen in other organ tissues.  The brain is unique in that it is separated from the rest of the body by a number of barriers that prevent  drugs from entering this organ. We believe that the lower brain concentrations of anti-HIV drugs  are not only due to the effect of the physical brain barriers, but also due to membrane proteins  (i.e., P-glycoprotein, Multidrug Resistance Proteins and Breast Cancer Resistance Protein) that can efficiently extrude these compounds out of the brain into the peripheral circulation as well as metabolic enzymes. We also propose that common regulatory mechanisms, such as the presence of specific cell receptors called , Pregnance X receptor (PXR) in rats and steroid  and xenobiotic receptor, SXR in humans,  control the production of these transporters and metabolic enzymes in the brain. Using various cell culture systems of the brain barrier and brain tissue isolated from both human and rat brain as well as in animal models, we propose to investigate the role that these receptors, membrane transporters and metabolic enzymes  play  in the accumulation and distribution of anti-HIV drugs. If these transporters and metabolic enzymes are  significantly active, then blocking their activity will result in higher drug concentrations and improved efficacy in the brain. This information is novel and clinically important since identifying mechanisms by which antiretroviral drugs accumulate or fail to accumulate in the brain can provide therapeutic strategies that will optimize delivery of these drugs in the treatment of the neurological consequences of HIV.",5 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=172919&lang=en
172921,CT And MRI in the Triage of TIA and minor Cerebrovascular events to identify High risk patients. (CATCH),Coutts  Shelagh B,"Coutts, Shelagh B",University of Calgary,Alberta,Canada,200809,300000.0,CIHR New Investigator,Salary Programs,Clinical,Circulatory and Respiratory Health,Ct; Epidemiology; Minor Stroke; Mri; Stroke; Tia,"Most strokes are caused by a blockage of an artery in the brain. In some stroke patients the symptoms from this blocked artery are mild or even transient. There are around half a million stroke patients who present with transient or mild stroke symptoms every year in North America. In the more severe strokes, clot busting drugs are used to unblock the blocked artery. This drug has a rare but serious side effect of bleeding into the brain and so doctors only use this drug when the symptoms are very severe. Tragically many of these mild patients have a second more severe stroke that leaves them disabled. If we can show which patients with mild deficits are at high risk for a second stroke, then we could target new drugs at patients who are at the highest risk.
Mild stroke patients with a blocked blood vessel and damage seen on a brain MRI scan are at high risk for a second stroke. Sadly MRI is not available as an emergency for most of Canada's population. In most centres CT scans are more readily available than MRI. If CT can identify which patients are at risk for a second stroke then many more at risk patients could be identified. In this study we are seeking to show that a CT scan can also predict which patients are at risk for a recurrent stroke. 
Patients with mild or transient deficits presenting within 24 hours of symptom onset to the emergency room will be enrolled in this study. Patients will have both a CT and a MRI scan completed quickly and the results for each test will be compared against how well the patient does. We will show whether a CT can predict which mild or transient events are going to do badly. It will also allow us to see whether CT or MRI is better in predicting who is going to do badly.  By using CT to predict outcome, our work is novel in that it could allow treatments to be more widely available than in just the specialised centres where MRI is available.",5 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=172921&lang=en
172930,The influence of inflammation on the balance between repair and  regeneration,Rossi  Fabio M,"Rossi, Fabio M",University of British Columbia,British Columbia,Canada,200808,100000.0,Catalyst Grant: Systems Biology Approaches to Immunotherapy,Operating Grants,Biomedical,Infection and Immunity,Adipocytes; Fibrosis; Macrophages; Regeneration; Skeletal Muscle; Transcriptome,"Damaged tissues can undergo repair or regeneration. Repair 
leads to the replacement of the lost tissue with non-functional 
components, usually fibrous scar or fat infiltration. Regeneration 
is a process at the endpoint of which the lost tissue is returned 
to full functionality. It is unclear what determines whether one of 
the other prevails following damage. Here, we propose to study 
the stem/progenitor cells involved in these processes and how 
their function is influenced by inflammatory cells. We will use 
skeletal muscle as a model system as scarring and fat infiltration 
are significant clinical problems in this tissue, but we expect 
similar mechanisms to be at play in other tissues. The results of 
this study could eventually lead to drugs to reduce scarring and 
improve regeneration",1 yr 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=172930&lang=en
172931,Understanding Infection and Immunity through Species-Comparative Kinome Analysis: Creation and Application of Species-Specific Peptide Arrays,Napper  Scott,"Napper, Scott",University of Saskatchewan,Saskatchewan,Canada,200808,98500.0,Catalyst Grant: Systems Biology Approaches to Immunotherapy,Operating Grants,Biomedical,Infection and Immunity,Bioinformatics; Innatedb; Kinome; Peptide Array; Systems Biology; Translational Research,"Phosphorylation-mediated signal transduction is a mechanism for regulation of host cell processes, including infection and immunity. Global characterization of signal transduction, particularly for species outside the research mainstream, is currently limited by the absence of research tools. This is problematic as many of these species provide relevant models of human disease. Global kinome analysis would greatly enhance the value of these animal models at a systems level and ensure efficient knowledge translation to clinical applications. To address this deficiency our lab has developed a methodology, based on genomic information, to create species-specific peptide arrays for global analysis of kinome responses. In this proposal, in collaboration with Dr. Brinkman, we will capitalize on the potential of these arrays to provide a systems biology perspective on processes relating to infection and immunity. Through creation of InnateDB, her lab has expertise in mapping pathways and processes of immune responses. Layering signal transduction information onto this existing framework will significantly increase the value of this publically available resource. Specifically, we will develop and apply peptide arrays to the analysis of porcine and human monocyte responses to stimuli which reflect defined components of viral and bacterial infections. The pig is an important model of human bacterial and viral infection and understanding dynamic patterns of phosphorylation-mediated signal transduction in response to these stimuli will provide valuable insights into mechanisms of immunity, conservation of responses across species, validation of animal models of disease and research translation to clinical applications. From a broader perspective this will provide a framework for development of species-specific customized arrays to better understand conservation of cellular responses across species and more detailed insight into the cellular mechanisms of disease.",1 yr 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=172931&lang=en
172933,The Ovarian Cancer Immune Epitope Database,Webb  John R,"Webb, John R","BC Cancer, part of PHSA (Vancouver)",British Columbia,Canada,200808,100000.0,Catalyst Grant: Systems Biology Approaches to Immunotherapy,Operating Grants,Biomedical,Infection and Immunity,Cancer; Immunology; Immunotherapy; Mass Spectrometry; Peptide,"The MHC class I peptide (MIP) repertoire comprises a collection of peptides that are presented at the cell surface in the context of MHC class I molecules for scrutiny by cells of the CD8+ lineage. Under conditions of microbial infection, CD8 T cell responses specific for pathogen-derived MIP peptides are elicited and these antigen-specific cells are primarily responsible for eradicating infection. However, under normal, steady-state conditions, peptides derived from ""self"" proteins are continually degraded as part of the constitutive activity of the proteasome and are presented on the cell surface as the ""self"" MIP repertoire. Likewise, tumor-associated antigens expressed by cancer cells are processed to become part of the cancer MIP repertoire and in doing so represent ideal target antigens for potential immunotherapeutic intervention.  Despite the tremendous potential importance of the cancer MIP repertoire, relatively little is known about its composition or complexity. In the current proposal we intend to catalogue the MIP repertoire present on the surface of ovarian cancer cells. Specifically, we will utilize malignant ascites samples from patients with stage III-IV ovarian cancer as a source of cells for mass spectrometry-based identification of MHC-associated peptides. Malignant ascites removed from ovarian cancer patients via paracentesis, or as part of de-bulking surgery, frequently contains extraordinary numbers of tumor cells (>108) which can be readily purified from any infiltrating immune cells. Two complimentary approaches for peptide purification will be utilized, 1) peptides will be directly eluted from surface MHC using mild acid treatment and 2) peptides will be acid eluted from specific MHC molecules that have been immuno-precipitated from tumor cell lysates. Peptides isolated using these approaches will be identified by tandem mass spectrometric approaches and a database corresponding to the ovarian cancer MIP repertoire will be established.",1 yr 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=172933&lang=en
172937,Biological networks regulating organ transplantation outcome,Mui  Alice L,"Mui, Alice L; Keown, Paul A; McManus, Bruce M; McMaster, W. Robert; Ng, Raymond; Wilkinson, Mark D",University of British Columbia,British Columbia,Canada,200808,100000.0,Catalyst Grant: Systems Biology Approaches to Immunotherapy,Operating Grants,Biomedical,Infection and Immunity,Gene Array; Graft Rejection; Immunosuppression; Metabolomics; Proteomics; Transplantation,"Organ transplantation remains the therapy of choice for patients with end-stage vital organ failure.  Pharmaceutical and biological engineering have produced a collection of immunosuppressive agents used to prevent graft rejection. However, although these agents reduce the rate of acute rejection and some may retard chronic vascular injury, graft loss and other complications associated with life-long immunosuppression remain important barriers to success.  A new approach for controlling the host response to the graft is needed, but this requires a better understanding of the cellular and molecular networks involved.",1 yr 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=172937&lang=en
172938,A systems biology approach to identifying responders to immunotherapy with anti-cytokine antibodies,Schrader  John W,"Schrader, John W",University of British Columbia,British Columbia,Canada,200808,97795.0,Catalyst Grant: Systems Biology Approaches to Immunotherapy,Operating Grants,Biomedical,Infection and Immunity,Arthritis; Monoclonal Antibodies; Proteomics; Transcriptome,"Monoclonal antibodies have revolutionized the treatment of rheumatoid arthritis.  However, about a third of patients are not helped by this very expensive treatment.  This research aims to develop methods to predict which patients will be not be helped and should be offered an alternative treatment.",1 yr 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=172938&lang=en
172948,Pioneering novel approaches to manage cancer recurrence  through the use of YB-1 inhibitors and off-patent drugs.,Dunn  Sandra E,"Dunn, Sandra E",University of British Columbia,British Columbia,Canada,200809,433402.0,Operating Grant,Operating Grants,Biomedical,Cancer Research,Breast Cancer; Chromatin Immunoprecipitation; Drug Screening; Recurrence; Tumor Initiating Cells; Yb-1,"Despite remarkable advances in the treatment of breast cancer one of the greatest challenges remains that of secondary tumors following seemingly successful therapy.  The reasons for cancer recurrence are not fully understood however it has been thought for quite some time that it occurs because there are tumor cells that are able to escape chemotherapy and radiation to remain dormant until an opportune time to regrow.  Some attribute this to the idea that within every tumor lies a small group of tumor initiating cells (TIC) that have not only the ability to escape the challenges of therapy but also to establish new tumor growth.  These so called TIC only constitute about 2-10% of the total tumor and have successfully been isolated from patients because they have a unique signature of cell surface proteins called CD44 and CD49f.  We recently made key observation that the Y-box binding protein-1 (YB-1) increases the abundance of CD44 and CD49f.  Importantly, YB-1 also confers multi-drug resistance and we find it is highly associated with breast cancer recurrence in an analysis of over 4000 cases.  Using a newly developed small molecule against YB-1, we intend to inhibit the expression of the CD44 and CD49f with the idea that this will suppress the growth of TIC and thus the re-establishment of tumors in mice.  In the second part of this project, we will take advantage of a high content screening instrument that will allow us to evaluate the potential for off patent drugs to be used to inhibit the growth of TIC.  In a preliminary screen, we have identified 27 drugs that could potentially block the growth of TIC however more work is needed to validate these findings.  What we hope to accomplish is a better understanding of what causes TIC to grow and moreover new ways of inhibiting them such that patients at high-risk recurrence will have a better chance of living cancer free in the future.",3 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=172948&lang=en
172960,The impact of antibiotics on intestinal microbiota of infants,Kozyrskyj  Anita L,"Kozyrskyj, Anita L; Scott, James A",University of Alberta,Alberta,Canada,200808,86030.0,Catalyst Grant: Human Microbiome,Operating Grants,Social / Cultural / Environmental / Population Health,Infection and Immunity,Antibiotic Utilization; Microflora Profiles; Molecular Typing,"Differences in intestinal microbiota have been found between allergic and non-allergic infants, and antibiotic use in early infancy has been linked to the development of allergic disease in children. Disruption of the intestinal microbiota is the proposed mechanism behind the association between antibiotic use in early life and allergic disease, but the evidence to support this thesis in humans is modest. Microflora studies in infants have either lacked information on antibiotic use or have been conducted soon after birth, at a time when antibiotic use, especially broad-spectrum antibiotic, is limited. Further, alteration of intestinal microbiota varies according to type of antibiotic, but this level of detail is not consistently available from parent-reported datasets. As part of the Canadian Healthy Infant Longitudinal Development (CHILD) Study, a four-site 5000 subject birth cohort study of the origins of allergic disease, we propose to evaluate the effect of antibiotic utilization in a subset of 100 infants on their intestinal microbiota at birth, 3 months and one year of age. This will be achieved through linkage of detailed database information on antibiotic prescription use in infants with their fecal bacterial profiles. Bacterial profiles will be determined using DNA fingerprinting of a common bacterial gene region combined with DNA sequencing. Antibiotic use in the infant will be evaluated against other factors which influence microbiota, such as mode of delivery and type of infant feeding. As this methodology has not yet been pursued, the proposed pilot study is needed to develop the processes for conducting these analyses for the whole CHILD cohort. An eventual objective of this research will be to determine whether antibiotic-induced changes in microbiota are associated with the development of allergic disease in children. In the end, the knowledge gained will inform guidelines for the judicious use of antibiotics during infancy.",1 yr 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=172960&lang=en
172964,Characterizing the fecal microbiome and bacteria-derived volatile organic compounds in patients with nonalcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD),Rioux  Kevin P,"Rioux, Kevin P; Kothandaraman, Maitreyi",University of Calgary,Alberta,Canada,200808,93999.0,Catalyst Grant: Human Microbiome,Operating Grants,Biomedical,Infection and Immunity,Bacterial Metabolism; Intestinal Microbiome; Nonalcoholic Fatty Liver Disease; Obesity; Quantitative Real Time Pcr; Terminal Restriction Fragment Length Polymorphism,"Background: The prevalence of obesity in Canadian adults and children has dramatically increased. Many experts cite obesity as a significant public health hazard. The vast communities of bacteria (microbiota) that live in the human intestine play a key role in human health; there is also evidence that implicates the gut microbiota in a variety of diseases, including obesity. For example, gut bacteria in obese patients enable them to harvest greater energy from their diet. Nonalcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD) is commonly associated with obesity and may progress to cirrhosis of the liver, hepatocellular cancer, or liver failure. The pathological features of NAFLD are very similar to liver injury induced by chronic ingestion of ethanol. A link between obesity, NAFLD and the intestinal microbiota may lie in the multitude of metabolites such as volatile organic compounds (VOCs) that are produced by bacteria in the gut. Hypothesis: Patients with NAFLD have alterations in their gut bacteria and/or associated VOCs that are relevant to the development of this disease.  Methods: This study will involve subjects with biopsy proven NAFLD and healthy controls. Molecular methods will be used to describe and quantify the fecal microbiota. Volatile organic compounds will be measured in fecal samples using mass spectrometry. Hydrogen breath testing will assess small bowel bacterial overgrowth. Computer analysis will discern whether there are significant differences between the composition or metabolic activities of fecal bacteria in NAFLD patients and healthy subjects. Relevance: With the obesity epidemic in Canada, the burden of NAFLD will continue to rise. The major concern in patients with NAFLD is the risk of developing advanced scarring of the liver leading to significant complications. This study will examine previously unexplored links between gut bacteria and the development of NAFLD, and may identify new ways to prevent or treat this common disease.",1 yr 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=172964&lang=en
172970,Assessing the impact of polymicrobial pulmonary infections in cystic fibrosis via metagenomics,Hwang  David M,"Hwang, David M; Guttman, David S",University Health Network (Toronto),Ontario,Canada,200808,96750.0,Catalyst Grant: Human Microbiome,Operating Grants,Biomedical,Infection and Immunity,Chronic Lung Disease; Cystic Fibrosis; Dna Sequencing; Metagenomics; Microbiome; Pulmonary Exacerbation,"Cystic fibrosis is characterized by progressive deterioration of lung function due to repetitive cycles of infection and scarring of the airways of the lungs. Although several bacterial species are known to infect the lungs in CF, there is growing awareness that the lungs of CF patients may actually harbor dozens of bacterial species. However, the identities of many of these remain unknown. How the composition of this bacterial community affects the severity of lung disease and the effectiveness of different treatments such as antibiotics is also unknown. It is also uncertain whether patients with different mutations in CFTR, the gene responsible for causing CF, harbor different bacteria and might therefore benefit from different treatments. Here, we propose to identify the constituents of the bacterial community of the lung in CF, using powerful new strategies arising from the Human Genome Project. By profiling and comparing this community in different groups of patients with different disease severities and different CFTR mutations, as well as patients treated with different antibiotics, we hope to provide answers to some of the questions raised above. We believe that this work will improve understanding of factors influencing bacterial infection in CF, and will ultimately help physicians to better tailor their treatments to the needs of individual patients.",1 yr 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=172970&lang=en
172972,Microbial metagenomics of the intestinal microbiota and the etiology of Clostridium difficile-associated disease in hospitalized patients,Manges  Amee R,"Manges, Amee R",Research Institute of the McGill University Health Centre,Qu&eacute;bec,Canada,200808,96992.0,Catalyst Grant: Human Microbiome,Operating Grants,Biomedical,Infection and Immunity,Clostridium Difficile-Associated Disease; Comparative Metagenomics; Intestinal Microbiota; Molecular Epidemiology,"Clostridium difficile-associated diarrhea (CDAD) is the most important cause of hospital-acquired diarrhea and has emerged as a significant public health issue in Québec.  Risk factors for CDAD include hospitalization, antibiotic use, underlying disease severity, and the overgrowth of C. difficile in the gut.  The relationship between these risk factors, the intestinal microbiota and the development of CDAD has not been well studied.  We will conduct a case-control study, embedded in the large cohort study of C. difficile epidemiology in Québec (the Fonds de recherche en santé du Québec (FRSQ) Clostridium difficile Consortium) to address this relationship.  CDAD cases and matched controls (n = 75) have been retrospectively identified from the FRSQ cohort between 2006 and 2007. Results from our 16S rDNA microarray (""DNA chip""), designed to capture species diversity from fecal samples, indicate that there is a significant difference (p < 0.001) in the mean intestinal microbial diversity between cases and controls.  This difference remained after adjusting for CDAD risk factors.  In our proposed project, we will extend these initial results by performing high-throughput 16S rDNA and random shotgun sequencing of bacterial genomes present in samples collected just prior to CDAD diagnosis (an approach termed microbial metagenomics).  The project will also address computational limitations of analytic approaches to microbial metagenomic data.  We will develop a combinatorial algorithm to identify associations (association rules) between bacterial species or patterns of species present in intestinal samples; this information will be will be used to study functional changes to the intestinal microbiota that result from hospitalization-related exposures in patients at risk of CDAD.  The project will advance research in the epidemiology of intestinal microbiota-mediated disease processes and may improve the management and treatment of C. difficile infected patients.",1 yr 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=172972&lang=en
172974,Role of the gut microbiome in Pediatric Gastrointestinal Illnesses,Stintzi  Alain,"Stintzi, Alain",University of Ottawa,Ontario,Canada,200808,98000.0,Catalyst Grant: Human Microbiome,Operating Grants,Biomedical,Infection and Immunity,16s Rdna Sequencing And Microarray; Crohn'S Disease And Ulcerative Colitis; Human Microbiome; Inflamatory Bowel Syndrome; Metagenomic; Pediatric Patients,"The causes for development of chronic gastrointestinal illnesses remain uncertain. Recent studies suggest that the type of bacteria that are in the intestinal tract of people may be important in staying healthy and an imbalance of the types of bacteria is associated with development of diseases or conditions such as Crohn's disease, ulcerative colitis or Irritable Bowel Syndrome. Inflammatory Bowel Disease (IBD) is the most common incurable chronic gastrointestinal illness in children and adolescents, with up to 30% of IBD patients developing disease before adulthood. More concerning, the number of IBD cases in children appears to be on the rise. Here, we propose to perform a comprehensive analysis of the gastrointestinal tract microbial population in children with IBD. We will test the hypothesis that the composition of the mucosa-associated microbes (bacteria and virus) and/or mobile DNA elements of this microbial population is a characteristic of the disease type, namely Crohn's disease and ulcerative colitis. Specifically, we will compare the types of microbes that are present right in the intestinal tract of those patients with Crohn's disease, ulcerative colitis, irritable bowel syndrome from otherwise healthy children without these conditions using DNA sequencing and high-throughput genomic approaches. The proposed pilot study will define a microbial ""fingerprint"" for each of these illnesses and will significantly increase our understanding of the role of the gut microbial population in the maintenance of health and/or development of disease. In turn, the gained knowledge could be used to guide future hypothesis-driven research aimed at manipulating the gut microbial population to treat disease or maintain human health.",1 yr 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=172974&lang=en
172981,Linking Infectious Agents to Cancer: A Metagenomics Approach,Holt  Rob,"Holt, Rob",University of British Columbia,British Columbia,Canada,200808,100000.0,Catalyst Grant: Human Microbiome,Operating Grants,Biomedical,Infection and Immunity,Carcinogenic Viruses; Gene Expression Analysis; Infectious Agents; Metagenomics; Whole Transcriptome Shotgun Sequencing (Wtss),"Infectious agents including viruses and bacteria are known causes of greater than 20% of cancer cases worldwide.  There are likely further infectious agent causes of cancer that are yet to be discovered, involving both known and unknown pathogens.  We propose to analyse the whole transcriptome of two tumour types in a small number of patients using the ultra high throughput sequencing and analysis.  These two tumour types have been chosen because of their suggested yet still unproven association with infectious agents.  This methodology, once validated, can be applied to many tumour types and will yield important data on the infectious causes of cancer.  This information can then be used for cancer treatment and prevention by targeting the cancer causing agents themselves.",1 yr 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=172981&lang=en
172982,Investigating the potential effects of host-derived stress hormones on the human gut microflora,Allen-Vercoe  Emma,"Allen-Vercoe, Emma",University of Guelph,Ontario,Canada,200808,98460.0,Catalyst Grant: Human Microbiome,Operating Grants,Biomedical,Infection and Immunity,Anaerobic Microbiology; Continuous Culture (Chemostats); Gut Bacteria; Inflammatory Bowel Disease (Ibd); Stress Hormones; Terminal Restriction Fragment Length Polymorphism,"The bacterial community that lives in the human gut (the microbiota) plays many roles in host health.  When the balance of the microbiota is perturbed, this can lead to an increase in 
the number of potentially pathogenic organisms, which in turn can cause disease.  Understanding the triggers for imbalances in the microbiota is a current research focus.  
Physiological and psychological stress can profoundly affect human health, and gastrointestinal symptoms are common in people who are exposed to stressful situations. However, the mechanism by which stress can potentiate disease is not well understood. 
Recently it was discovered that some bacteria recognize stress hormones within the host and respond to them, altering their patterns of gene expression in order to adapt to their 
surroundings. Whether the bacteria that live in the human gut are affected by human stress hormones, and if so, whether this interaction can affect the balance of the microbiota is currently 
not known.
I propose to grow gut bacterial communities in vitro, and to examine the responses of these cultures to key stress hormones.   In particular I propose to examine the response of gut microbial communities derived from Inflammatory Bowel Disease (IBD) patients compared to those derived from healthy individuals.  I hypothesize that disruption of the balance of bacterial species within a community will result from stress hormone exposure, and that this disruption will be more marked in bacterial communities derived from IBD patients. 
Discovery of a direct link between exposure of the gut microbiota to stress hormones in vitro, and subsequent imbalance of this community, will be a major advance in our understanding of how gut bacteria can influence our health in times of stress, and may point to hitherto unexplored 
therapeutic targets for many diseases in which stress plays a direct role, including IBD.",1 yr 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=172982&lang=en
172983,The Role of the Gastrointestinal Microbiota in Asthma,Finlay  Barton B,"Finlay, Barton B",University of British Columbia,British Columbia,Canada,200808,99725.0,Catalyst Grant: Human Microbiome,Operating Grants,Biomedical,Infection and Immunity,Antibiotics; Asthma; Atopic Diseases; Intestinal Flora; Microbiota,"Allergic asthma is an ever-increasing problem in developed 
countries and affects approximately 20% of all Canadians.  
Although there are many theories about the potential cause of 
asthma, the actual causes remain undefined. Recent evidence 
suggests that shifts in resident microbiota (normal flora) may 
play a significant role in atopic diseases such as asthma (the so-
called ""hygiene hypothesis""). However, the role of the 
gastrointestinal microbiota in asthma has not been explored 
experimentally, and no attempt has been made to identify 
microbial populations that may be associated with, or more 
importantly, hinder development of asthma. In this application 
we propose to explore the contribution of the microbiota to 
asthma.  We will use a well characterized murine model of 
asthma to determine if the microbiota plays a role in this 
disease.  This will be achieved by varying the microbiota using 
different antibiotics, characterizing resulting population shifts 
using a variety of techniques, and then inducing asthma.  The 
microbiota of antibiotic pretreated animals will also be 
reconstituted with microbiota from susceptible and resistant 
populations.  Collectively, these approaches will provide key 
information about the role of the intestinal microbiota in 
asthma, and identify a specific subset associated with asthma. It 
will also provide novel insights into the effect of antibiotics on 
the intestinal flora, and bring together investigators with very 
different skills all working on a common problem.  Ultimately 
this information could be used to develop new ways of treating 
asthma.",1 yr 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=172983&lang=en
172987,Establishing a complete taxonomic baseline for the human microbiome,Neufeld  Josh D,"Neufeld, Josh D",University of Waterloo (Ontario),Ontario,Canada,200808,100000.0,Catalyst Grant: Human Microbiome,Operating Grants,Health systems / services,Infection and Immunity,Bioinformatics; Dna Sequencing; Gut Samples; Human Microbiome; Oral Biofilms; Ribosomal Sequence Tags,"The survey and study of the microbial communities associated with the human body is necessary to properly understand the important link between these communities and our health. The application of molecular techniques that work directly on samples is necessary given the small proportion of the microbiome that is readily cultivable. However, traditional sequencing-based techniques have been limited by cost and labour limitations. The purpose of the proposed research is to comprehensively characterize the taxonomic diversity of oral and gut microbial communities by a) pioneering a novel ultra-high throughput sequencing technique and b) developing bioinformatic tools for the analysis of large DNA sequence libraries from human microflora. Samples will be prepared from multiple oral locations, lower intestine samples through screening biopsies, and fresh fecal material from the same limited cohort of healthy male and female individuals. The proposed method will yield an unprecedented number of 16S rRNA gene sequences from these samples, allowing for the identification of all organisms in these complex microbial communities. This new method promises to be an effective and economical alternative to other molecular community characterization approaches such as fingerprinting, taxonomic microarrays and clone library sequencing. The unprecedented volume of data will require custom algorithms for clustering and comparison of ribosomal sequence tags. We will develop these algorithms by modifying existing bioinformatic tools that have been designed for smaller datasets. This study will be the first to comprehensively survey the communities associated with the oral and intestinal microflora, identify correlations between these two communities within healthy individuals, and reveal organisms that exist at low relative abundance in the human body.",1 yr 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=172987&lang=en
172988,Developing Ethical and Regulatory Guidelines for Research on the Human Microbiome and its Applications: Speaking to the Experts and Stakeholders,O'Doherty  Kieran C,"O'Doherty, Kieran C; Arck, Petra C",University of British Columbia,British Columbia,Canada,200808,96500.0,Catalyst Grant: Human Microbiome,Operating Grants,Social / Cultural / Environmental / Population Health,Infection and Immunity,Development Of Regulatory Frameworks; Ethical; Human Microbiome; Social And Legal Implications; Stakeholder Analysis,"Research on the human microbiome and its potential applications have fundamental differences to other human health research in terms of legal and ethical implications. For instance, whereas most medicinal drugs prescribed in clinical settings do not have an effect beyond the individual patient, the use of microbes in clinical settings may also have a direct physical impact on members of the patient¿s family or community. Thus, developing a deeper understanding of the human microbiome may lead to interventions that target public as well as individual health. In addition, given that human microbiota are much easier to manipulate than the human genome, the number of potential applications arising from human microbiome research may well dwarf that of research on the human genome. Given these unique circumstances, the advent of research into the human microbiome stands to benefit from a parallel effort to develop ethical guidelines to regulate such research and its applications. Social scientific research can help by informing such regulatory frameworks so that emerging technologies are applied in line with community values. This in turn will foster public trust in the research and facilitate basic and translational research on the human microbiome. Such a regulatory framework would be most effective if it were to draw on the input from experts, stakeholders, and the public. In this project, we propose to begin the process of collating and critically analysing the diversity of views and positions on human microbiome research and its applications. The project will focus on interviews with experts and stakeholders, such as scientists specializing in microbiology, genomics and related fields, disability advocates, clinicians, and public health officials. Ideally, this work would also form the foundation for a follow up project that would focus on conducting a larger engagement event with members of the public informed by principles from deliberative democracy.",1 yr 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=172988&lang=en
172994,Metagenomic characterization of the human vaginal microbiome,Money  Deborah M,"Money, Deborah M",B.C. Women's Hospital (Vancouver),British Columbia,Canada,200808,99909.0,Catalyst Grant: Human Microbiome,Operating Grants,Clinical,Gender and Health,Chaperonin-60 Gene; Genital Tract Infections; Pyrosequencing; Reproduction; Vaginal Microbiome; Women'S Health,"Within a healthy human body, there exist many microbial communities that play critical roles in our body's state of health and disease. For example, disruptions to the microbial ecosystem of the vagina can result in profound consequences to women, including enhanced acquisition of HIV and other sexually transmitted infections, pelvic inflammatory disease, infertility, early pregnancy loss, and localized infections that significantly impact quality of life. To understand the vaginal microbes and how they can modulate women's health and diseases, we need to identify and characterize microbes involved in these processes. Traditionally, identification of microbes from the human body fluid is performed by various laboratory tests which lack both accuracy and sensitivity. Today, with the advance of new DNA sequencing technologies in biomedical research, this can be achieved by genome-wide approaches such as the metagenomic techniques, which allows analysis of genetic materials derived from complete microbial communities harvested from their natural environments. 

In this study, we propose to use one of the new DNA sequencing technologies, pyrosequencing, that we have developed in recent years, to tackle the identities of individual microbes in the woman's genital tract. We will collect vaginal samples from healthy women and perform analysis of these samples by pyrosequencing and bioinformatics tools. We will be able to examine and identify comprehensively the microorganisms living in the female genital tract with great accuracy. The data collected from this project will no doubt help us to identify and characterize microbes that are related to women's health and provide us information to develop potentially new treatments and therapies that can be either preventive or reactive to women's diseases.",1 yr 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=172994&lang=en
172996,Elusive respiratory pathogens in the oropharyngeal flora,Surette  Michael G,"Surette, Michael G",University of Calgary,Alberta,Canada,200808,87500.0,Catalyst Grant: Human Microbiome,Operating Grants,Biomedical,Infection and Immunity,Bacterial Pneumonia; Bronchiectasis; Gemella; Oropharyngeal Flora; Respiratory Infection; Streptococcus,"The organisms responsible for up to 30% of bacterial respiratory infections are not identified in the clinical laboratory and consequently are treated empirically by physicians.  The bacteria responsible are often members of the normal microbiome, residents of the oral/nasal cavity that can be pathogenic when they grow in the lower respiratory tract. We have previously identified two groups of bacteria (Streptococcus Milleri and Gemella spp) that account for up to 50% of hospitalizations in adult cystic fibrosis.  We will extend our studies into bacterial pneumonias and non-CF bronchiectasis using molecular and microbiological approaches. This preliminary study will focus on identifying common pathogens in these cases and in developing improved methods for detection and characterization of the organisms present.  A significant effort will focus on the Streptococci which are a diverse and in terms of the normal flora, a poorly characterized group of bacteria.",1 yr 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=172996&lang=en
172998,Risk of hypertensive disorders in pregnancy after living kidney donation,Garg  Amit,"Garg, Amit",London Health Sciences Centre Res. Inc. (Ont.),Ontario,Canada,200809,99020.0,Operating Grant: Maternal and Child Health,Operating Grants,Health systems / services,"Human Development, Child and Youth Health",Administrative Database; Fetal Outcomes; Gestational Hypertension; Living Kidney Donation; Preeclampsia; Pregnancy,"Living kidney donation is now the major form of transplantation in North America. For various reasons most kidney donors are women. Female donors often ask their doctors whether donation will have any effect on their future pregnancies. The kidneys regulate salt and water in the body, and it is possible women with one kidney will have more blood pressure difficulties during pregnancy than others. In Ontario we are able to study this issue using large health care databases, and data from the Trillium Gift of Life Network. We will compare the pregnancy outcomes of kidney donors to similar healthy people who do not become kidney donors (who we call controls). We expect to study about 180 pregnant kidney donors and 1800 pregnant controls. The information from this study will help people make informed decisions about living donation. It may also guide health care which prevents health problems in pregnant donors.",2 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=172998&lang=en
173003,Assessing the Size Dependent Cancer Targeting of Herceptin-coated Nanoparticles,Chan  Warren C,"Chan, Warren C",University of Toronto,Ontario,Canada,200809,419013.0,Operating Grant,Operating Grants,Biomedical,Cancer Research,Bio-Distribution; Breast Cancer; Herceptin; Nanotechnology; Targeting,"Advances in nanotechnology research have produced a large library of nanoparticles (e.g., quantum dots, metallic nanoparticles, carbon nanotubes, and iron oxide nanoparticles) with distinct optical, electronic, and magnetic properties for many biomedical applications such as a contrast agent and/or drug delivery vehicle for cancer diagnostics and/or therapeutics.  These engineered nanoparticles are expected to improve diagnostic sensitivity and accuracy, and enhancing drug delivery and therapy. Multi-functional systems that integrates different nanoparticles and molecules are being developed; these systems are designed for use as agents that can be imaged using two different modes (e.g., magnetic and optical) or can be used as a diagnostic and therapeutic system.  These multi-functional systems are expected to make a tremendous impact in the fight against cancer.  In order to engineer nanoparticles for in vivo cancer applications, there is a tremendous need to understanding the interactions of the nanoparticle with in vivo biological environment.  An elucidation of how the size, shape, and surface chemistry of a nanoparticle interact with the biological environment could lead to development of guidelines that helps in the design of the nanoparticle for biomedical application.  This is an immense need for the translation of  a nanotechnologies into in vivo biomedical applications.",4 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=173003&lang=en
173011,Knowledge Transfer and Exchange Practices: A systematic review of the quality and types of performance measures used to assess KTE implementation effectiveness and impact,Van Eerd  Dwayne,"Van Eerd, Dwayne",Institute for Work &amp; Health (Toronto),Ontario,Canada,200810,100000.0,Knowledge Synthesis Grant,Operating Grants,Health systems / services,Health Services and Policy Research,Knowledge Synthesis; Knowledge Transfer And Exchange; Knowledge Transfer Practices; Kt Tools And Evaluation; Measurement Properties; Systematic Review,"Knowledge transfer and exchange (KT) is an important practice. However the effectiveness of current practices has not been evaluated. The need for such evaluation has been voiced (Lavis et al, 2003, Eccles et al, 2005). Recent reviews have provided starting points for KT evaluation research (Skinner & Mitton). However they focus on rather narrow topics of knowledge (diabetes, depression). A review of the KT literature generally in clinical, health systems/services, and population health is needed. The objectives of this knowledge synthesis project are to: 
1)	critically review the broad scope of literature on evaluation of KT practices 
2)	document/describe the tools/instruments used in evaluation

To address these objectives, a team of researchers and decision makers will follow a systematic review process developed by Institute for Work & Health building on both the Cochrane review framework and the ""best evidence synthesis"" framework. The review steps include: formulation of research question and search terms; identification of articles expected in literature search; decision-maker meetings to review research question, definitions, search terms and inclusion criteria; literature search conducted; title and abstract review for relevance; quality appraisal review conducted; data extraction review conducted; evidence synthesis; decision-maker meetings to review evidence synthesis and develop key messages; and report preparation. Decision-makers will be involved in all aspects of the systematic review.
The Institute for Work & Health, along with its partners, is well positioned to complete this synthesis of knowledge.  The Institute has recently developed an Occupational Health & Safety Prevention Review Program that has completed 13 full reviews and 5 scoping reviews and manages the Cochrane Back Review Group.  Importantly, the Institute has become a leader in qualitative research synthesis. 

*Complete reference list will be submitted with full proposal",1 yr 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=173011&lang=en
173012,"Silos and Social Identity: What can the social identity approach tell us about healthcare teamwork, system integration, and staff engagement?",Moffatt  Michael E,"Moffatt, Michael E; Kreindler, Sara A",University of Manitoba,Manitoba,Canada,200810,49739.0,Knowledge Synthesis Grant,Operating Grants,Health systems / services,Health Services and Policy Research,Health Services Research; Interprofessional Relationships; Multidisciplinary Teamwork; Scoping Review; Social Identity Theory; System Integration And Care Coordination,"Healthcare is a team effort involving many different healthcare professions, programs, and sites.  Unfortunately, a lack of cooperation between these different groups can result in a poorly coordinated system in which patients ""fall through the cracks.""  Divisions between healthcare professions - such as doctors and nurses, General Practitioners and specialists, or clinicians and management - can also stand in the way of system improvement.  This review will explore how the Social Identity Approach, a leading theory of group processes, can help us understand and improve inter-professional relationships in healthcare.  By mapping out how social identity and other concepts have been used to study healthcare teamwork, inter-professional education, engagement in organizational change, and related issues, we hope to provide tools for building stronger teams and a better-coordinated system.",1 yr 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=173012&lang=en
173023,Interventions to Improve Continuity of Care in the Follow-up of Patients with Cancer: A Cochrane Systematic Review,Aubin  Mich&egrave;le,"Aubin, Michèle",Universit&eacute; Laval,Qu&eacute;bec,Canada,200810,100000.0,Knowledge Synthesis Grant,Operating Grants,Health systems / services,Health Services and Policy Research,Cancer Care; Continuity Of Care; Interprofessional Collaboration; Systematic Review,"Many authors have recognized the lack of continuity in the services needed by patients with cancer. These persons often require treatment from multiple health care providers located in various settings, thus leading to fragmented and uncoordinated care. On completion of cancer treatment, patients are often discharged back to their family physician who does not always have access to all information related to the patient' s condition. To address this problem, health authorities recommend that patients completing cancer treatment should be given a comprehensive care summary and follow-up care plan to optimize continuity and coordination of their care. However, the essential elements of these plans need to be identified, the involvement of the various providers in the creation and application of these plans need to be determined, and ways to optimize communication between the providers should also be evaluated. The present review aims to determine how effective are available interventions designed to improve continuity of care for patients with cancer. Studies will be included when a majority of participants are either patients with cancer or their health care providers. All well-defined interventions explicitly aiming to improve continuity of cancer care will be included in this review. This systematic review will provide valuable information regarding best practices in the follow-up of patients with cancer.",1 yr 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=173023&lang=en
173026,Effect of a web-based self-management intervention for patients with type 2 diabetes on clinical and psychological outcomes,Yu  Catherine,"Yu, Catherine; Zahn, Catherine",University of Toronto,Ontario,Canada,200810,174729.0,Operating Grant: Knowledge to Action,Operating Grants,Health systems / services,"Nutrition, Metabolism and Diabetes",Integrated Knowledge Translation; Patient Self-Management; Qualitative Methodology; Type 2 Diabetes; Web-Based Technology,"Diabetes is becoming increasingly common, and persons with diabetes unfortunately frequently develop heart attacks, strokes, kidney failure and other serious complications. Although these complications can't be completely prevented, lifestyle, medications and other treatments can prevent such complications in a large number of persons with diabetes.  Unfortunately, there are gaps in the quality of preventive care currently received by persons with diabetes. For example, high blood sugars are frequently under-treated.  Given the longstanding nature of diabetes, teaching patients to care for themselves - ""self-management"" - can help to bridge this gap.  Although these strategies can work, doctors may not do this as part of routine care, patient participation in these programs is low, and the effects of these programs wear off over time.  Using the Web may be helpful, by including strategies for changing behaviour over the long-term, that are available to more people, and that can happen outside of the doctor's office.  Unfortunately, many diabetes websites use a traditional type of presentation that does not appeal to the person nor use proven strategies for changing behaviour.  This project will compare self-confidence, self-management skills, quality of life, satisfaction, blood sugar, blood pressure, cholesterol and weight in participants at several time points before the tool is put into use, and compare them with those measured at several time points after six months.  This project will also ask participants whether the web-based resource is feasible and acceptable.  This study will examine tools that may improve the lives of people with diabetes at a personal and population level, and direct resources for optimal health care delivery.",2 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=173026&lang=en
173029,Closing care gaps in cardiovascular medicine,Hackam  Daniel G,"Hackam, Daniel G; Ferguson, Anne E",Western University (Ontario),Ontario,Canada,200810,0.0,Knowledge Synthesis Grant,Operating Grants,Health systems / services,Health Services and Policy Research,Cardiovascular Disease; Meta-Analysis; Prescribing; Quality Of Health Care; Systematic Review,"Every seven minutes in Canada, an individual dies from a heart attack or stroke.  Patients who have survived a previous heart attack or stroke are at increased risk for future cardiovascular events and dying from atherosclerosis (hardening of the arteries).  Strong evidence from clinical trials suggests that patients with these conditions should receive long-term treatment with an anti-platelet drug (such as aspirin), a cholesterol-lowering drug (such as a statin), an ACE inhibitor or angiotensin blocker, and a beta blocker.  Despite numerous physician guidelines promoting these medications, many affected individuals do not receive these drugs.  Our goal is to comprehensively review and synthesize the medical literature to determine the most effective strategies for increasing the prescribing of these lifesaving therapies in patients with cardiovascular disease.  With the help of our partner, the Canadian Cardiovascular Society, results from this research will be disseminated to the cardiovascular community, enter the current guideline creation cycle, and enhance ongoing efforts to improve the quality of cardiovascular prevention for Canadians.",1 yr 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=173029&lang=en
173030,"Developing, implementing and evaluating self-audit as a knowledge translation strategy for practice-based learning and practice guideline implementation: A scoping review",Gagliardi  Anna R,"Gagliardi, Anna R","Sunnybrook Research Institute (Toronto, Ontario)",Ontario,Canada,200810,49223.0,Knowledge Synthesis Grant,Operating Grants,Health systems / services,Health Services and Policy Research,Continuing Professional Development; Guideline Implementation; Practice Guidelines; Scoping Review Of The Literature; Self-Directed Learning; Stakeholder Workshop,"Among health professionals, self-audit means reviewing one's own practice to identify problems and their cause, and understand how to improve the quality of health care services they provide. To maintain medical certification, physicians in Canada, the United Kingdom and United States are required to show annual proof of learning activities, including self-audit. Our research and that of others shows that family physicians and general surgeons spend little time on self-audit, mostly because they do not know how.  Practice guidelines are documents that summarize the most current research and provide physicians with recommendations for how to manage patients with different conditions. Simply producing guidelines does not mean they are used, as has been shown by numerous studies. International guideline experts suggest that physicians would more likely use guidelines if they contained, or were accompanied by tools that helped them compare their practice with guideline recommendations. Researchers analyzed many guidelines from different countries and found that most did not contain such information. Creation of self-audit tools could assist a greater number of physicians to more easily review their own practice. This would help them to conduct meaningful learning activities necessary to maintain medical certification, and adopt practice guideline recommendations. By doing so, they are equipped to deliver the best possible care to their patients. So that we can test self-audit tools in future research studies we will search the medical literature and Internet to learn more about the features of self-audit tools used successfully by others, and invite physician educators, medical licensing groups, practice guideline developers, family physicians and general surgeons to a one-day meeting where they will be asked to review the findings and suggest how we should develop a self-audit tool.",1 yr 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=173030&lang=en
173035,Devenir obstétrical des femmes nées prématurément,Nuyt  Anne Monique,"Nuyt, Anne Monique","Centre hospitalier universitaire Sainte-Justine (Montr&eacute;al, Qu&eacute;bec)",Qu&eacute;bec,Canada,200809,49825.0,Operating Grant: Maternal and Child Health,Operating Grants,Clinical,"Human Development, Child and Youth Health",Complication De Grossesse; Diabète Gestationnel; Hypertension Gravidique; Programmation Développementale; Prématurité; Prééclampsie,"Résumé non scientifique : Un enfant issu d'une grossesse et/ou une naissance compliquées peut être à risque de développer des maladies dans le futur, même à l'âge adulte. En effet, plusieurs études associent un milieu foetal et périnatal adverse et une augmentation de l'incidence des maladies cardiovasculaires et métaboliques, telles que l'hypertension artérielle, l'obésité et le diabète de type II. Les enfants nés prématurément (<37 semaines de gestation) sont issus d'une grossesse compliquée (d'où la naissance prématurée) et subissent un environnement néonatal potentiellement dommageable, les rendant plus à risque de développer des maladies à l'âge adulte. Selon le concept que la grossesse représente une fenêtre sur l'avenir cardiovasculaire et métabolique de la femme, il est possible de croire que les jeunes femmes adultes qui sont nées prématurément auront davantage de complications lors de leur propre grossesse que les femmes qui sont nées à terme. L'objectif principal de ce projet est donc d'évaluer la relation entre la prématurité et les complications de grossesse à l'âge adulte. Pour y arriver, nous comparerons dans les banques de données administratives les complications de grossesse qu'ont eu toutes les femmes nées prématurément au Québec entre 1970 et 1985 et qui ont eu au moins un enfant, aux complications de grossesse qu'ont eu un nombre équivalent de femmes nées à terme au Québec entre 1970 et 1985 et qui ont aussi eu au moins un enfant. Ce projet pourrait permettre d'identifier un «nouveau» groupe à risque de développer des complications de grossesse, soit les femmes nées prématurément, entraînant une modification majeure des soins obstétricaux quant aux mesures de prévention, de dépistage et de prise en charge précoce.",2 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=173035&lang=en
173036,Predictors and Outcomes of Prenatal Care: Vital Information for Future Service Planning,Heaman  Maureen I,"Heaman, Maureen I; Martens, Patricia J",University of Manitoba,Manitoba,Canada,200809,0.0,Operating Grant: Maternal and Child Health,Operating Grants,Health systems / services,"Human Development, Child and Youth Health",Access To Care; Disparities In Use Of Health Care Services; Health Care Providers; Pregnancy Outcomes; Prenatal Care; Secondary Analysis Of Provincial Databases,"Prenatal care is an important health service that has the potential to improve the health of pregnant women and result in better pregnancy outcomes.  However, not all women receive an optimal level of prenatal care.  We plan to conduct a population-based study of all births in the province of Manitoba from 2003 to 2008 to examine patterns of prenatal care use throughout the province (e.g., timing of initiation of care, number of prenatal visits, type of provider), to identify how these patterns differ by socioeconomic status and geographic region, and to determine factors influencing use of prenatal care (e.g., maternal age, education, marital status, depression, receiving social assistance).  For each birth, the mother's prenatal care will be categorized as ""no care"", ""inadequate care"", ""intermediate care"", ""adequate care"", or ""intensive care.""  We will then study the relationship between the various categories of prenatal care and health status measures (e.g., illness of the mother or baby, death of the baby, premature birth, low birth weight), mother's health behaviors (e.g., smoking, breastfeeding), and health care use (e.g., use of well baby care, completeness of infant immunizations).  The relationship between the type of health care provider (e.g., midwife, obstetrican, family practice doctor) and outcomes will also be studied.  This study will involve analysis of existing data files available in the Population Health Research Data Repository at the Manitoba Centre for Health Policy (MCHP).  Strict security measures are in place within MCHP to protect the confidentiality of the data files, and the data files do not contain identifiable personal information. The results will provide important information about disparities in access to and use of prenatal care, and how use of prenatal care is related to pregnancy outcomes.  These findings will provide vital information for health care decision makers to assist them with future service planning.",2 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=173036&lang=en
173037,"Asthma, use of controller therapy during pregnancy and perinatal outcomes",Blais  Lucie,"Blais, Lucie",Universit&eacute; de Montr&eacute;al,Qu&eacute;bec,Canada,200809,97000.0,Operating Grant: Maternal and Child Health,Operating Grants,Social / Cultural / Environmental / Population Health,"Human Development, Child and Youth Health",Administrative Databases; Asthma; Controller Therapy; Inhaled Corticosteroids; Low Birth Weight; Pregnancy; Preterm Birth; Small For Gestational Age Babies,"The prevalence of asthma among pregnant women is between 4 to 7% and is known as one of the most frequent chronic diseases encountered during pregnancy. Concerns about teratogenicity of asthma medications during pregnancy might lead women to stop or reduce their use of controller therapy, but this fear must be balanced against the risk of loss of asthma control and exacerbations. Lack of oxygen to the foetus can lead to perinatal mortality, intrauterine growth retardation, and preterm birth. Inhaled corticosteroids is the controller therapy of choice during pregnancy and its discontinuation may be one of the most important reasons leading to uncontrolled asthma during pregnancy. Evidence on the association between asthma control through the use of controller therapies during pregnancy and the prevention of adverse perinatal outcomes is scarce. 

We plan to reconstruct a large cohort of pregnancies from asthmatic women from the linkage of three databases: Régie de l'assurance-maladie (RAMQ) database which provides medical service and prescription claims data, MED-ECHO database which provides hospitalization data and the birth and death registries. This cohort of pregnancies will be used to investigate whether or not there is an association between the dose of inhaled corticosteroids used during pregnancy and the risk of small for gestational age babies, low birth weight babies and preterm delivery. The use of inhaled corticosteroids during pregnancy will be measured with medication claims data recorded in the RAMQ databases. This study will allow us to evaluate whether or not inhaled corticosteroids taken at moderate to high doses during pregnancy are safe for the fetus.",2 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=173037&lang=en
173038,BCG vaccination and type 1 diabetes: exploring an association using a retrospective birth cohort assembled from the Québec BCG and live birth registries,Rousseau  Marie-Claude,"Rousseau, Marie-Claude","INRS - (Qu&eacute;bec, QC)",Qu&eacute;bec,Canada,200809,99943.0,Operating Grant: Maternal and Child Health,Operating Grants,Social / Cultural / Environmental / Population Health,"Human Development, Child and Youth Health",Administrative Databases; Bcg Vaccination; Linkage; Registry; T1d; Type 1 Diabetes,"Type 1 diabetes (T1D) is one of the most chronic diseases diagnosed in children, teenagers and young adults. It is a lifelong disease where the body produces little or no insulin. Children with diabetes use multiple daily insulin injections to control the disease along with following rigorous diets and restricted sugar consumption which disrupts their daily life and causes psychological, social and educational difficulties. Several studies suggest that specific exposures at critical periods in early life such as with Bacillus Calmette-Guérin (BCG) could affect how a child's immune system develops. The epidemiological evidence on the effect of BCG vaccination with regard to T1D is however sparse and inconsistent. A BCG vaccination campaign was held in Québec between 1949 and 1974 targeting newborns and school-age children. The vaccination records are kept in a registry at INRS-Institut Armand-Frappier.  Our study will make use of this provincial registry to investigate the prospective effect of BCG vaccination on the development of T1D by performing record linkage of the BCG vaccination dataset with existing medical and socio-demographic databases from the Canadian province of Québec. This study will add to the current research of the potential health effects of immune stimulation in early age and will contribute to the knowledge on mechanisms and factors related to T1D.",2 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=173038&lang=en
173046,Knowledge synthesis and update in interventions to reduce ED overcrowding.,Rowe  Brian H,"Rowe, Brian H",University of Alberta,Alberta,Canada,200810,100000.0,Knowledge Synthesis Grant,Operating Grants,Health systems / services,Health Services and Policy Research,Emergency Medicine; Knowledge Translation; Overcrowding; Systematic Reviews; Updating,"Emergency Departments (ED) overcrowding is a system-wide, multi-factorial problem within the Canadian health care system. During the last decade, with the restructuring and regionalization of the Canadian health system, an aging population, under-supply of health human resources and other factors, ED overcrowding has become the most challenging issue currently facing emergency care providers and one of the most important issues in health care delivery. We have previously completed reviews examining interventions to reduce ED overcrowding; however, newer methods and evidence need to be incorporated into updated reviews. The objective of this proposal is to continue the preliminary work started in 2005 by updating and maintaining a repository of Systematic Reviews regarding interventions to reduce ED overcrowding. Using comprehensive and established search strategies, and using established methods to avoid publication and selection bias, we will select all available evidence from clinical reports on interventions to reduce ED overcrowding. Following inclusion decisions, we will grade the manuscripts for risk of bias, extract and enter data; when possible, we intend to pool data and examine heterogeneity through sub-group and sensitivity analyses. This work will provide clinicians, health authorities and policy makers experiencing serious ED overcrowding with an opportunity to base their clinical and administrative decisions on the best available evidence.",1 yr 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=173046&lang=en
173047,Cartographie de l'étendue des connaissances en nanomédecine et autres domaines connexes: de la recherche fondamentale à son application,Beaudry  Catherine,"Beaudry, Catherine; Agard, Bruno; De Crescenzo, Gregory",Polytechnique Montr&eacute;al,Qu&eacute;bec,Canada,200810,49999.0,Knowledge Synthesis Grant,Operating Grants,Health systems / services,Health Services and Policy Research,Articles; Brevets; Nanobiotechnologie; Nanomédecine; Réseaux D'Innovation; Techniques De Fouille De Données (Data Mining),"Les sciences de la nanomédecine sont actuellement en effervescence,  on assiste au développement rapide de nouvelles connaissances, aussi bien en médecine, biologie et nanotechnologie. Régulièrement, de nombreuses applications dans chacun de ces domaines et à leurs frontières voient le jour. La variété des sciences concernées ainsi que la variété des nouvelles applications, créées simultanément en différents endroits et par différents intervenants rendent très difficile voir impossible, pour une personne, d'avoir une vue complète et fine des connaissances disponibles (et des lacunes) dans ces thèmes.
Le projet proposé vise à cartographier ces connaissances. À partir des bases de données existantes d'articles sur la nanotechnologie et la biotechnologie (déjà en grande partie adaptées aux besoins du projet), ainsi qu'à l'aide d'une base de données de brevets sur les applications de la nanotechnologie (cette base est aussi déjà disponible), nous proposons d'extraire et de représenter l'étendue des connaissances en nanomédecine.
Les outils utilisés seront les outils de gestion de bases de données, d'analyse des réseaux  sociaux (social network analysis) et de fouille de données (data mining). L'intérêt de ce projet est de rendre tangible les réseaux de connaissances (les liens entre les connaissances),  les réseaux entre les applications brevetées, ainsi que les réseaux entre les instigateurs de ces nouveaux développements. Une telle cartographie permettra de mettre en relief les frontières entre les connaissances et leurs applications afin de montrer les potentialités de nouveaux développements.
Cette cartographie sera une aide précieuse pour les décideurs, qui disposeront alors d'une information fiable sur l'état des connaissances et de leur mise en application. Ils pourront déterminer où concentrer les efforts de nouveaux développements, là où les retombées seront maximales pour le bien-être de la population, en fonction des politiques et des moyens disponibles.",1 yr 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=173047&lang=en
173059,Developing a framework for evaluating a comprehensive provincial health care model for children with diabetes using existing population databases,Amed  Shazhan,"Amed, Shazhan",University of British Columbia,British Columbia,Canada,200809,49000.0,Operating Grant: Maternal and Child Health,Operating Grants,Health systems / services,Health Services and Policy Research,British Columbia; Diabetes; Existing Population Databases; Pediatrics; Performance Evaluation Framework; Quality Of Care,"Life-long disease affects roughly 20% of children and is expensive to the health care system. Canada¿s current health care system is not well designed to provide good health care to children with complex chronic disease. Diabetes is one of the most common chronic diseases in children and requires thorough and coordinated care between various health and non-health areas. It is well known that good control of blood sugars is necessary to prevent the long term effects associated with diabetes. Currently, in British Columbia, changes in the health care system to improve the long-term health in persons with diabetes do not address the specific needs of children and therefore, do not acknowledge the potential impact of childhood diabetes on health care systems and society at large. Additionally, more and more children are being diagnosed with type 2 diabetes, a disease that traditionally surfaced during adulthood. Therefore, diabetes in children is a disease that should not be ignored. The goal of this study is to describe pediatric diabetes in British Columbia in terms of: the number of children with diabetes, how these children use the health care system and the costs associated with this use, the quality of health care provided to these children, and the impact of having diabetes on their emotional health and school performance. The results of this study will be shared with health care administrators and providers who will be involved in the planning of a new model of diabetes care for children with diabetes living in BC where community-based, high quality diabetes care will be offered to all children in the province, regardless of where they live.",2 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=173059&lang=en
173064,Pain in people with developmental disabilities: A scoping review.,Temple  Beverley A,"Temple, Beverley A",University of Manitoba,Manitoba,Canada,200810,38185.0,Knowledge Synthesis Grant,Operating Grants,Health systems / services,Health Services and Policy Research,Developmental Disability; Pain; Scoping Review,"People with developmental disability (DD) do not have equal access to pain assessment in the current health care system as pain is commonly assessed as a subjective experience and is difficult to assess through observation (Phan, Edwards, Robinson, 2005). Practitioners identify difficulty in providing consistent assessment of pain and provide evidence of people with DD suffering needlessly with fractures, bowel obstructions and cancer where pain assessments were not conducted accurately.  Organization of current health care for people with ID is provided mainly by nonprofessional care givers, and there is a lack of pain assessment tools and procedures available to care providers. This scoping review is based on the social communication model of pain (Oberlander, & Symons, 2006). The objectives of the review are to identify in the literature on pain in people with DD: 1) theory, evidence and gaps in knowledge ; 2) behaviors associated with pain; 3) pain assessment tools; and 4) barriers to pain assessment. A structured review of the literature published since 1990 will be performed by a group of multidisciplinary professors and care providers, with consultation from outside experts. This review will contribute to the future implementation of relevant pain assessment tools useful to care providers to improve the quality of care provided to people with DD. The results of the review will be shared widely with care providers, families and community agencies providing service to people with DD through web pages, e-mail notices and presentations and papers.",1 yr 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=173064&lang=en
173067,Changing practice behaviour: Evidence-based strategies to improve outcomes for antisocial youth.,Granic  Isabela,"Granic, Isabela; Edmondson, Anne M",Hospital for Sick Children (Toronto),Ontario,Canada,200810,133500.0,Operating Grant: Knowledge to Action,Operating Grants,Health systems / services,"Human Development, Child and Youth Health",Antisocial/Violent Behaviour; Knowledge Translation; Observational Methods; Parent-Child Relations; Treatment Evaluation And Modification,"The rate of adolescents in Canada charged with violent crimes has increased by 12% in the last decade and 30% since 1991. Effective interventions are critical not only for the well-being of antisocial adolescents and their families, but also to protect victims. Randomized clinical trials have established Multisystemic Therapy (MST) as one of the most effective interventions for antisocial youth. However, not all youth benefit from this approach. Our program of research aims to understand this variation by identifying the key mechanisms of change underlying successful MST outcomes. Over the last five years, we have partnered with community agencies across Ontario and developed a clinical research network comprised of scientists, clinical directors, MST consultants, supervisors and therapists. The large body of knowledge we have gained from our first round of studies on mechanisms of change in real-world MST settings has been shared with participating community agencies and stakeholders. The next step is to change practice behaviour with this knowledge. The current proposal has four goals: (1) to work in partnership with MST consultants and supervisors to develop training materials that target the mechanisms of change we have empirically identified as key predictors of MST success; (2) to evaluate the uptake of this new knowledge by MST therapists; (3) to analyze extant data from audiotaped therapy sessions in order to identify fine-grained therapeutic strategies most predictive of MST success; (4) to hold interactive roundtable discussions with our network plus selected MST clients to collectively analyze and interpret findings from these data and to develop plans for a second round of dissemination to further refine practice behaviour. Overall, effective and ineffective therapeutic interactions will be specified, MST supervisors will be better able to train clinicians to tailor treatment to diverse families, and MST will be more effective and cost-efficient.",2 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=173067&lang=en
173072,How Safe are Rural maternity Services across Canada?,Grzybowski  Stefan C,"Grzybowski, Stefan C; Kornelsen, Jude A",University of British Columbia,British Columbia,Canada,200809,93272.0,Operating Grant: Maternal and Child Health,Operating Grants,Health systems / services,Health Services and Policy Research,Health; Maternity Care; Population Catchments; Rural,"Across rural Canada over the past ten years there has been a significant erosion of small rural maternity services.  Closures have occurred for a number of reasons including difficulty recruiting maternity care providers, concerns about the quality of maternal and newborn outcomes in small facilities, and an emphasis on regionalization and consequent centralization of rural services which has swept across Canada.  A comprehensive review of policy at both provincial and national levels does not find evidence of a systematic approach to planning rural maternity service delivery.  The safety of small rural maternity services with and without caesarean section is not well researched, though on balance the evidence suggests that even without local caesarean sections, small maternity services can provide good care and that it is likely better to have even a limited service than no local intrapartum service at all in a rural community. 
The goal of this proposal is to expand the work that has been done on a provincial level across selected rural Canada jurisdictions, including those provinces with perinatal databases amenable to integration with B.C.¿s dataset.  The objectives of this study are to:

1.	Establish rural population catchment areas within one hour of maternity services and linked to postal codes,
2.	Define hospital service levels for all rural hospitals to be included in the study,
3.	Link population catchments to local rural hospitals with intrapartum services and stratify hospital catchments by level of service, and
4.	Analyze newborn outcomes and selected maternal outcomes and compare results across service levels adjusting for aboriginal ethnicity and socioeconomic status at catchment level.

This work will contribute to our understanding of the safety of rural maternity services in Canada.  At the Centre for Rural Health Research, a study is currently in analysis examining provincial rural population maternal and newborn outcomes.",2 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=173072&lang=en
173077,"Improving healthcare consumer effectiveness: An Animated, Self-serve, Web-based Research (ANSWER) tool for people with early rheumatoid arthritis",Li  Linda C,"Li, Linda C; Adam, Paul",University of British Columbia,British Columbia,Canada,200810,189100.0,Operating Grant: Knowledge to Action,Operating Grants,Health systems / services,Musculoskeletal Health and Arthritis,Animation; Decision Aid; Help-Seeking; Knowledge Translation; Medication Use; Rheumatoid Arthritis,"For people with rheumatoid arthritis (RA), the period shortly after the diagnosis is often filled with uncertainties and anxiety as they are searching for information to make treatment decisions. The objective of this 'Knowledge-to-Action' project is to improve people's ability to engage in shared decision-making about their treatments, and their knowledge and skills to become more effective users of healthcare resources. We will develop and evaluate an Animated, Self-serve, Web-based Research (ANSWER) tool for these patients. This tool will combine the best evidence of treatment options, the contextual information about how people make healthcare decisions, and the concept of Effective Consumers.

The content, storyline, and animation for the ANSWER tool will be developed through the collaboration of researchers/members of 6 disciplines (clinical and health services research; social and information sciences, knowledge translation, and graphic design/animation production) and stakeholders from the arthritis community. The final product will be uploaded to The Arthritis Society website for public access and evaluation.

We envision that the ANSWER tool will help accelerate the dissemination of knowledge and skills necessary for people with RA to manage their health at the early stage of their disease. Furthermore, this innovative project will provide the common ground for individuals who have not engaged in arthritis research to develop new collaborations with stakeholders in this field, including non-profit organizations (e.g., The Arthritis Society), patient/consumer organizations (e.g., Canadian Arthritis Patient Alliance), and healthcare organizations (e.g., Mary Pack Arthritis Program).",2 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=173077&lang=en
173082,Comorbidity of parental depression and alcohol misuse and its effects on children's mental health: An  accelerated longitudinal study,Elgar  Frank J,"Elgar, Frank J",Carleton University (Ottawa),Ontario,Canada,200809,99216.0,Operating Grant: Maternal and Child Health,Operating Grants,Social / Cultural / Environmental / Population Health,Population and Public Health,Accelerated Longitudinal Research Design; Alcohol Misuse; Child Mental Health; Discrete-Time Survival Analysis; National Longitudinal Survey Of Children And Youth; Parental Depression,"Depression and alcohol abuse are common health problems in Canada. Unfortunately, these problems also tend to run in 
families. Millions of children are put at risk for mental health problems as result of living with a parent with a depressive 
illness or addiction to alcohol. It is unclear what accounts for this risk and how best to promote the health and development 
of these children.

Our research examines the contribution of parental depression and alcohol misuse to the onset of emotional, behavioral and 
social problems in their children. We will use data that were collected from a cohort of parents and children in the National 
Longitudinal Survey of Children and Youth (NLSCY). 

Our research will address three research questions: 
1. Do parental depression and alcohol misuse have added or interactive effects on the onset of child outcome? In other 
words, does the co-existence (or ""comorbidity) of these problems in parents have a greater impact on children's mental 
health than would be predicted by each problem alone?
2. Are these effects consistent from early childhood to late adolescence?
3. Are these effects explained by changes to the child's social environment (e.g., parent-child hostility, poor parental 
monitoring, or family dysfunction)?  

Our research will also explore developmental changes these mediators across stages of child development. An accelerated 
longitudinal design will enable us to follow a cross-section of age groups over a period of 12 years in a way that allows us to 
study change from ages 4 to 23. 

This research will give us a better understanding the how mental illness and alcohol problems are passed down from 
parents to children. Our findings will enhance treatment interventions and community-based policies and programs that 
aim to increase resilience among children who are exposed to mental illness or alcohol misuse in their parents.",2 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=173082&lang=en
173084,Systematic review of acute care hospital geriatric intervention units,Fox  Mary,"Fox, Mary; Rivera, Tiziana; Sidani, Souraya","York University (Toronto, Ontario)",Ontario,Canada,200810,100000.0,Knowledge Synthesis Grant,Operating Grants,Health systems / services,Aging,Acute Care For Elders (Ace); Geriatric Health Services; Hospitalization; Older Adults; Outcomes; Systematic Review,"Specialized geriatric services have been designed to reduce the complications of hospitalization for acutely ill older adults with complex chronic disease. These complications can include not being able to return home and take care of oneself. Although some studies on these services have found them to prevent complications, a rigorous review of their effectiveness has not been done. Hospital administrators have said they need to know exactly which services, delivered by which health care providers, are effective in preventing complications. In this project we will review all of the studies that have been done on these services. We will put together all of the information that has been written about these services. We will examine which services are best at preventing complications for older adults. Hospital administrators will use the results to make decisions when designing geriatric services and policies so that older adults have fewer complications during their hospital stays.",1 yr 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=173084&lang=en
173085,"Use of anti-infectives, and more specifically antibiotics, during pregnancy: Risks and benefits for the mother and child",B&eacute;rard  Anick,"Bérard, Anick","Centre hospitalier universitaire Sainte-Justine (Montr&eacute;al, Qu&eacute;bec)",Qu&eacute;bec,Canada,200809,100000.0,Operating Grant: Maternal and Child Health,Operating Grants,Social / Cultural / Environmental / Population Health,"Human Development, Child and Youth Health",Administrative Databases; Anti-Infective Drugs; Antibiotics; Pregnancy; Pregnancy Outcomes; Quebec Pregnancy Registry,"Although anti-infectives including antibiotics are amongst the most frequently used drugs during pregnancy, there is no agreement on the absolute risks and benefits for the mother and her child. Antibiotics are indicated for the outpatient treatment of prevalent pregnancy complications such as urinary tract infections and bacterial vaginosis, which are themselves associated with a high incidence of pelvic inflammatory disease, premature rupture of membranes, preterm labour/chorioamniotitis, premature deliveries, low birth weight (LBW) infants, and foetal mortality. Given that indications for antibiotics use during gestation are themselves increasing the risk of adverse perinatal outcomes, it is pivotal to determine the risk/benefit ratio of anti-infectives, more specifically antibiotics use during pregnancy for the mother and the child. The objectives of this study are to quantify the associations between anti-infectives, and more specifically antibiotics exposure during pregnancy and the risk of prematurity, low birth weight, small for gestational age babies, and major congenital malformations, considering the indications for use. Data will be obtained from the Quebec Pregnancy Registry (QPR) that includes data on all pregnancies in Quebec from 01/01/1998 to 31/12/2008. The Registry was built with the linkage of three administrative databases: the Régie de l'assurance maladie du Québec, MedEcho, and ISQ. The results of this study will give evidence-based data on the effect of gestational use of anti-infectives, and more specifically antibiotics, on the health of the mother and her child, taking into account the indication for use.",2 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=173085&lang=en
173087,Synergizing Expectation and Execution for Stroke Communities of Practice Innovations,Poissant  Lise,"Poissant, Lise; Ahmed, Sara",Universit&eacute; de Montr&eacute;al,Qu&eacute;bec,Canada,200810,191500.0,Operating Grant: Knowledge to Action,Operating Grants,Clinical,Health Services and Policy Research,Best Practices; Chronic Disease Management; Communities Of Practice; Qualitative And Quantitative Methods; Stroke,"Each year, over 50,000 Canadians will suffer a stroke. With specialized diagnostic and therapeutic procedures, a large majority of individuals now survive their stroke and with the ageing population, stroke is likely to become a highly prevalent condition and to have great impact on the use of health care resources across the continuum.  To offset this situation requires an appropriate use of existing resources and the development of innovative approaches that can answer patients¿ needs more efficiently. This research project proposes to examine how health professionals and managers, from different disciplines and organisations will adhere to recommendations forthcoming from the Quebec provincial stroke strategy, led by Heart and Stroke Quebec, and adopt national stroke best practices. More specifically, our study will examine factors that influence individual and organisational state-of-readiness to change and will examine processes used by health professionals and managers to meet individuals¿ expectations while respecting best practice recommendations. Complementing and extending the face-to-face activities of the Montreal Stroke Network, an electronic platform (e-collaborative website) will be developed, creating a networking environment that will provide capacity to capture knowledge sharing and evolution around members interactions on practice changes to be implemented. Stroke best practice recommendations will be presented on the platform in a pre-defined format and timeline in order to create ¿traffic jam¿, i.e, abundant threads of discussion. Researchers will act as moderators to ensure project identification aimed at implementing best practice recommendations. This project is expected to enhance our understanding of collaborative work across disciplines and organisations in accelerating implementation of best practices along the continuum of care and how e-technologies influence access, sharing, creation and application of knowledge.",2 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=173087&lang=en
173093,BENEFITS OF AN E-LEARNING RESOURCE FOR IMPLEMENTING STROKE REHABILITATION BEST PRACTICES: A collaborative effort by researchers and knowledge users to move evidence into practice,Korner-Bitensky  Nicol A,"Korner-Bitensky, Nicol A; Straus, Sharon E",McGill University,Qu&eacute;bec,Canada,200810,141440.0,Operating Grant: Knowledge to Action,Operating Grants,Health systems / services,Health Services and Policy Research,Critical Incident Technique; Decision Makers; Evidence-Based Practice; Interviews; Knowledge Acquisition; Knowledge Translation; Online Questionnaires; Partnership; Practice Behavior; Rehabilitation; Repeated Measures; Stroke; Sustainability; Websites,"There is strong evidence that the best possible care based on the latest research is not being provided to stroke survivors. To move new knowledge regarding stroke rehabilitation into clinical practice, researchers and decision makers have teamed up to create an interactive e-learning resource. This resource provides rehabilitation clinicians with ¿bottom line¿ summary statements as to the effectiveness of treatments (StrokEngine: www.strokengine.ca) and quality of assessments (StrokEngine-Assess: www.strokengine-assess.ca) based on well-designed research studies. To examine whether this e-learning resource can effectively help clinicians learn and apply stroke best practices , a sample of 308 Ontario stroke rehabilitation clinicians (occupational therapists and physical therapists) will be randomly selected to participate in a study. Clinicians will use StrokEngine as much as possible while at work or at home for 3 months. Referring to a patient case study, clinicians will be tested for new knowledge gained about stroke best practices by responding to online questions each month. A sub-group of these clinicians will participate in a telephone interview at post-intervention in order to explore changes in their practice behaviors. By having researchers and decision makers communicate and problem solve throughout the entire research project, they can produce an e-learning resource designed for rehabilitation clinicians to renew their knowledge and improve their practice. This team will also brainstorm a plan to promote long-term use of StrokEngine among clinicians and other potential users (students, administrators, clients with stroke & family).",2 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=173093&lang=en
173099,Examen de l'étendue des connaissances sur l'usage optimal des médicaments psychotropes en milieu carcéral,Lafortune  Denis,"Lafortune, Denis; Dubreucq, Jean-Luc",Centre de recherche Institut universitaire en sant&eacute; mentale de Montr&eacute;al,Qu&eacute;bec,Canada,200810,80925.0,Knowledge Synthesis Grant,Operating Grants,Health systems / services,Health Services and Policy Research,Accès Aux Services; Application Des Connaissances; Coordination Des Services; Dépistage; Formation; Meilleures Pratiques; Médicaments Psychotropes; Observance De La Prescription; Obstacles À L'Implantation; Pratiques Prometteuses; Prisons; Recension Des Écrits; Troubles Mentaux Graves; Usage Optimal,"Au niveau des pénitenciers fédéraux, les rapports de l'Enquêteur correctionnel, révèlent que plusieurs plaintes déposées par les détenus et leurs proches étaient reliées à la dispensation des services de santé mentale. Au niveau des établissements provinciaux du Québec, le personnel du bureau du Protecteur du citoyen traite lui aussi des plaintes ayant le même objet. La réforme des services de santé mentale dans les prisons est devenue une priorité au Canada. Au sein des établissements de détention, la médication psychotrope représente généralement le traitement psychiatrique le plus fréquemment utilisé. Les objectifs du projet sont donc de: a) ratisser systématiquement la documentation disponible sur l'usage optimal des médicaments psychotropes en milieu carcéral, en faisant ressortir les concepts clés et les sources de données probantes; b) d'identifier les meilleures pratiques ou les pratiques prometteuses en cette matière; et c) d'identifier les obstacles/ contraintes limitant l'implantation des meilleures pratiques en cette matière. Pour mieux opérationnaliser la notion d'usage optimal des médicaments psychotropes en établissement carcéral, six dimensions sont prises en considération: le dépistage des troubles mentaux lors de l'admission; l'accès aux services de soins en santé mentale en établissement carcéral; la continuité/ coordination des services intra muros/ extra muros de soins en santé mentale; l'observance de la prescription et réduction de l'extorsion/ trafic de médicament dans les établissements; l'usage des médicaments antipsychotiques «au besoin» (PRN) et la formation du personnel non médical (ex: gardiens) qui accompagne les détenus ayant une prescription. Les résultats de cet examen de l'étendue des connaissances seront discutés avec des décideurs des établissements carcéraux du Québec, de manière à permettre la mise en place d'une synthèse plus systématique en 2009 qui, elle-même pourrait donner lieu à des innovations sur le plan des pratiques.",1 yr 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=173099&lang=en
173106,Les TIC pour soutenir l'échange des connaissances : Impacts sur la main d'oeuvre dans le secteur de la santé,Gagnon  Marie-Pierre,"Gagnon, Marie-Pierre",Universit&eacute; Laval,Qu&eacute;bec,Canada,200810,99700.0,Knowledge Synthesis Grant,Operating Grants,Health systems / services,Health Services and Policy Research,Main D'Oeuvre; Revue Systématique; Technologies D'Information Et De Communication; Échange Des Connaissances,"La pénurie d'effectifs dans le secteur de la santé constitue un problème d'envergure au Canada et ce, plus particulièrement dans les régions éloignées. Le CSSS du Grand Littoral fait partie des milieux qui connaissent un problème de main d'oeuvre depuis les dernières années. Ce problème a des répercussions importantes au niveau de l'accès aux services de santé pour la population. Il est donc urgent de chercher des solutions novatrices et de développer des stratégies en vue d'optimiser l'emploi des ressources disponibles et de concevoir de nouveaux modes de pratique. Parmi ces solutions, les technologies d'information et de communications (TIC) ont souvent été proposées comme pouvant avoir un effet positif sur le recrutement et la rétention de la main d'oeuvre. Toutefois, les connaissances actuelles font défaut quant à l'impact réel des TIC sur les différents aspects reliés au travail des professionnels de la santé. C'est donc par un partenariat avec les décideurs du CSSS du Grand Littoral que nous souhaitons étudier la question en faisant une revue systématique de la littérature sur l'impact des interventions utilisant les TIC sur la satisfaction à l'égard de l'emploi, la qualité de vie au travail et la rétention de la main d'oeuvre dans le domaine de la santé. Ce travail, en collaboration étroite avec des décideurs et intervenants directement impliqués, permettra de proposer des solutions aux problématiques touchant les ressources humaines au CSSS du Grand Littoral qui pourront éventuellement être transférables à d'autres régions.",1 yr 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=173106&lang=en
173108,Early Identification of Families with Young Children at Risk: Evaluating a Public Health Screening Measure through the Use of NLSCY Data,Dahinten  Susan V,"Dahinten, Susan V",University of British Columbia,British Columbia,Canada,200809,74536.0,Operating Grant: Maternal and Child Health,Operating Grants,Health systems / services,"Human Development, Child and Youth Health",Child Health And Development; Family Risk Factors; Longitudinal Data; Public Health; Risk Factor Research; Screening,"Many young Canadian children experience poor physical, cognitive, communicative, and psychosocial development. Public health nurses have a long history of providing preventive services to families to support parenting and promote healthy childhood development, but there has been little evaluation of the measures or systems used to identify those families who have the greatest need of their services. Therefore, the two objectives of this longitudinal study are to evaluate a postpartum screening measure (Parykn Postpartum Screen) that is commonly used by public health nurses across Canada to identify families with young children at risk for poor development and to develop and test a revised measure, and compare its predictive value with the Parkyn Screen. Evaluation of the Parykn Postpartum Screen will be conducted through secondary analysis of data from the National Longitudinal Survey of Children and Youth (NLSCY). Four cohorts of children selected from the first four cycles of the NLSCY will form the sample for this longitudinal study. Child health and developmental outcome measures will be drawn primarily from Cycles 3 through 6 of the NLSCY, when the children are either 2-3 or 4-5 years of age. The NLSCY collects data on risk factors that constitute the Parkyn screen (e.g., low birth weight, maternal age, parental mental health, and family financial resources). The NLSCY also collects data on child outcomes of interest such as health status and unintentional injuries, language development, and developmental delays. The results of this study are intended to contribute to more effective family risk screening in public health nursing practice, so that the children and families who are most at risk receive necessary support services. Results will be shared with health services policy-makers, practitioners, and researchers through various means including professional and academic journals, meetings, and conferences, and web sites.",2 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=173108&lang=en
173109,Understanding why some women do not breastfeed,McDonald  Sarah D,"McDonald, Sarah D",McMaster University,Ontario,Canada,200809,27875.0,Operating Grant: Maternal and Child Health,Operating Grants,Clinical,"Human Development, Child and Youth Health",Breastfeeding; Hierarchical Modelling; Niday Database; Observational Studies; Predictor Variables,"Breastfeeding is very important to the health of infants, children and mothers. Breastfeeding protects against the development of diseases in infants and children (including sudden infant death syndrome, ear infections, infections of the gastrointestinal tract and breathing tract, asthma, allergies, obesity and diabetes), and mothers (diabetes, breast cancer and ovarian cancer).  Exclusive breastfeeding (without supplementation) is the best method of feeding infants and is recommended for the first six months of life.  Certain groups of women may be at particularly high risk of not breastfeeding, including First Nations women, women who are obese, or women who have twins.  Most of the existing studies are biased because they only examine women who volunteer to be involved in research.  Many studies do not explore the effect of whether the women was cared for by a midwife, family doctor or obstetrician, or the type of hospital at which she delivered, all of which we propose to do.  
     We propose to study rates of breastfeeding in all women in Ontario who deliver a healthy infant.  We will study factors that predict why some women intend to breastfeed and others do not, as well as why some women actually breastfeed and others do not.  We will use the Niday perinatal database, which collects information on Ontario deliveries, mothers and infants, as well as the health care providers and hospitals.  Our research team involves people with expertise in breastfeeding, pediatrics, neonatal nursing, obstetrics, clinical epidemiology and biostatistics.
      Breastfeeding rates are suboptimal given the benefits for infants, children and mothers. Identifying factors that predict breastfeeding and not breastfeeding will be the important first step in developing breastfeeding support strategies to address barriers at all levels (patient, health care provider and hospital) in order to improve rates of breastfeeding.",2 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=173109&lang=en
173110,Safer Medications for Children: Quantifying nephrotoxicity through  secondary analysis of electronic health records data,Parshuram  Christopher S,"Parshuram, Christopher S",Hospital for Sick Children (Toronto),Ontario,Canada,200809,100000.0,Operating Grant: Maternal and Child Health,Operating Grants,Clinical,"Human Development, Child and Youth Health",Adverse Drug Event; Medication; Nephrotoxicity; Paediatrics; Renal Failure; Safety Research,"Drug therapy is a major part of healthcare for children. While drugs are given to treat, relieve symptoms and cure disease, drugs may also cause harm. Children deserve safe medications that do not harm them with side effects. Studying drug safety in children is very challenging, and the sickest children often receive drugs that have been incompletely tested. Kidney failure is an important unwanted side effect that can occur with severe disease, and can be made worse by drugs. Our data shows kidney failure occurs in 12% of ICU-days. Children with kidney failure are at significantly increased risk of death, and survivors stay longer in the ICU. 
This research will find out which medications are contributing to kidney failure in a large group of critically ill children (half of those in Ontario). We will combine information from 6 databases to study the effects of drugs on kidney function. The successful outcome of this research will include identifying the drugs associated with greatest amounts of kidney failure. Better understanding about drugs that are toxic to kidneys may allow these drugs to be avoided, or used in different ways to reduce kidney failure and improve the outcomes of critically ill children.",2 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=173110&lang=en
173137,The Role of SPARC in Cancer Therapy Sensitization,Tai  Isabella T,"Tai, Isabella T",University of British Columbia,British Columbia,Canada,200809,300000.0,CIHR New Investigator,Salary Programs,Biomedical,Cancer Research,Cancer Biology; Cancer Genomics; Chemotherapy Resistance; Colorectal Cancer; Gene Expression,"The goal to improving mortality from cancer is to achieve complete response to therapy.  However, chemotherapy resistance has been a difficult problem to overcome. In order to better understand this phenomenon, our laboratory used a whole genome approach to obtain a snapshot of the changes that occur when cancer cells develop resistance to chemotherapy.  This allowed us to identify SPARC as a gene that may play a role in changing the sensitivity of cancer cells to chemotherapy.  We have been able to demonstrate that low SPARC levels in chemotherapy resistant human MIP101 colon cancer cells was associated with cancer cells that were resistant to therapy.  However, if SPARC was restored by either re-expressing this gene at higher levels, or by introducing the SPARC protein in tissue culture, colon cancer cells became more sensitive to chemotherapy.  In animal models, treatment with SPARC also allowed colon cancer cells to respond better to chemotherapy, and this was demonstrated by greater tumor regression in animals receiving SPARC with chemotherapy than in animals receiving chemotherapy alone. These exciting preliminary results serve as the basis of this research grant, as it proposes to study the mechanisms by which SPARC changes the sensitivity of colon cancer cells to chemotherapy.  The ultimate goal in understanding these mechanisms is the possibility of developing additional agents that would be useful in the treatment of colon cancer, especially in cases of previously failed cancer therapy.",5 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=173137&lang=en
173139,Development and evaluation of a rapid multiple infectious agent nanolitre real-time PCR panel to diagnose food and water borne infections in Northern Aboriginal communities,Slinger  Robert,"Slinger, Robert",Children's Hospital of Eastern Ontario Research Institute Inc,Ontario,Canada,200808,98200.0,Catalyst Grant: Safe Food and Water in Northern Communities,Operating Grants,Clinical,Infection and Immunity,Diarrheal Disease; Food And Water Borne Infections; Molecular Diagnostics; Multi-Pathogen Pcr; Nanotechnology; Real-Time Pcr,"There are widespread concerns about the risk of outbreaks of food and water borne bacterial, viral and parasitic infections transmitted through unsafe food and water in Canadian Northern Aboriginal communities. These infections cause symptoms like diarrhea, vomiting, stomach pain and fever. In some cases, severe complications such as kidney failure, anemia (low blood), arthritis, and paralysis can result from these infections. 

We believe the first step in dealing with food and water borne illnesses is accurate diagnosis of their causes. This will help ensure patients receive appropriate treatment and, on a community level, will help prevent the spread of the infection to others. 

However, the causes of the vast majority of diarrheal infections go undiagnosed because of the poor sensitivity of current diagnostic methods. Development of a rapid diagnostic assay that enables simultaneous screening of multiple food and water pathogens in these communities is therefore urgently needed. 

We plan to devise such a multiple diarrheal pathogen assay using an innovative new technology that we have pioneered the use of in Canada, known as nanolitre real-time PCR.  Our aim is to be able to diagnose the 20 most important bacterial, viral, and parasitic infections at the same time, in only a few hours. We will evaluate this diagnostic panel in comparison to conventional currently used using diarrheal specimens from Northern aboriginal communities. 

We believe the multiple pathogen panel will radically improve and accelerate the diagnosis of food and water borne diarrheal illness in Northern aboriginal communities. Physicians and health authorities can then use this information for the benefit of the both the individual and the community.",1 yr 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=173139&lang=en
173140,Do combined exposures to chemicals and microbial pathogens through food and water lead to establishment of chronic diseases in remote northern and first nations communities?,Sattar  Syed A,"Sattar, Syed A; Filion, Lionel G; Robidoux, Michael",University of Ottawa,Ontario,Canada,200808,98000.0,Catalyst Grant: Safe Food and Water in Northern Communities,Operating Grants,Social / Cultural / Environmental / Population Health,Indigenous Peoples' Health,Biological Pathogens; Chemical Contaminants; Food; Northern Communities; Risk Assessment; Water,"There is evidence of increased levels of some chronic diseases among first nations and northern communities when compared with the rest of Canada. While it is well recognized that certain food- and waterborne pathogens can lead directly to chronic conditions, this might be only a part of the story. It is our hypothesis that combined exposures to chemicals and pathogens through food and water can lead to establishment of chronic diseases. The University of Ottawa and its partners have linkages with Indian and Inuit aboriginal communities across Canada. This proposal is for preparation of future larger studies with the ultimate target of disease prevention. Tasks planned here include a) the establishment and consolidation of the interdisciplinary team and its capabilities, b) study and recruitment of the  partner communities and of key individuals within the communities, c) community-approved protocols for confidential handling of sensitive personal information, and d) establishing, through pilot sample analyses, optimal methods for collection, handling, transportation and processing of food, water and patient samples.",1 yr 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=173140&lang=en
173145,PEI Perinatal Database Access Feasibility Study,Bryanton  Janet A,"Bryanton, Janet A; Sanford, Carolyn",University of Prince Edward Island (Charlottetown),Prince Edward Island,Canada,200809,21000.0,Catalyst Grant: Maternal and Child Health,Operating Grants,Health systems / services,"Human Development, Child and Youth Health",Feasibility Study; Maternal-Newborn Health; Perinatal Database; Secondary Analysis,"The Prince Edward Island Reproductive Care Program (PEIRCP) began in 1984 with the major aim of improving fetal, maternal, newborn, and family health during the prenatal through postnatal periods. One important aspect of this program is the PEI Perinatal Database, a population based database that houses perinatal information on all PEI mothers and newborns since 1990.  Given that some of the main goals of the PEIRCP are: to promote research in maternal, newborn, and family health as a basis for evidence-based decision making and program changes and to act as a catalyst for change based on research evidence and best practices, the ability to perform secondary analysis is key. There is great potential to improve health outcomes for mothers and newborns by answering research questions using this database. Unfortunately, there is currently no way to share the data with the research community. The PEIRCP needs resources to determine the processes and policies that must be put in place to allow for a process to share data for research purposes.  This process must follow strict provincial guidelines surrounding privacy and protection of the data.  In addition, program personnel wish to study the database's ability to be linked with other provincial databases, which could provide  valuable information for researchers, locally, regionally, and nationally. To that end, the principal investigator from the University of Prince Edward Island is partnering with the PEIRCP of the PEI Department of Health to conduct a feasibility study about access to and use of the PEI Perinatal Database.",0 yr 9 mths,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=173145&lang=en
173146,Predicting Mental Health Problems in Later Childhood: Linking Early Development and Children and Youth Mental Health Service Databases,Chen  Alice W,"Chen, Alice W; Waddell, Charlotte A","Simon Fraser University (Burnaby, B.C.)",British Columbia,Canada,200809,25000.0,Catalyst Grant: Maternal and Child Health,Operating Grants,Social / Cultural / Environmental / Population Health,"Human Development, Child and Youth Health",Children'S Mental Health; Data Linkage; Early Child Development; Early Identification; Risk Factors; Secondary Data Analysis,"Knowledge about children's mental health is critical, as most adult mental disorders originate in childhood and 14% of children suffer from mental disorders that cause impairment in their lives.  There are effective programs to prevent the development of mental health problems.  If we can identify the children at risk at an early age, we can target interventions at these children and minimize the impact of mental health problems.  The objective of this proposed project is to link existing clinical and administrative databases in British Columbia (BC) in order to study the association between the developmental status of children in kindergarten and their use of mental health services for significant mental health problems in later childhood.  These databases include the (1) EDI ¿ results of an instrument that assesses children¿s social, emotional and cognitive development and that is administered to all kindergarten children in BC; and (2) the CARIS and BCFPI ¿ electronic systems which track the children and youth referred to community mental health services in BC and also assess their symptoms and functioning.  In this project, we will negotiate agreements with data holders to access these databases, arrange for linkage to be performed, and assess the outcome of the linkage.  Once linkage is successfully completed, we can conduct further research to investigate whether the dimensions of early child development in the EDI predict the emergence of mental health problems and use of mental health services in later childhood.  Such knowledge will increase our understanding of the risk factors for mental disorders in children, facilitate the early identification of children at risk and greatly benefit the development of policies and programs to prevent mental health problems.",0 yr 9 mths,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=173146&lang=en
173151,Feasibility of Quebec administrative health databases linkage for studying First Nations and Inuit birth outcomes,Luo  Zhong-Cheng,"Luo, Zhong-Cheng","Centre hospitalier universitaire Sainte-Justine (Montr&eacute;al, Qu&eacute;bec)",Qu&eacute;bec,Canada,200809,25000.0,Catalyst Grant: Maternal and Child Health,Operating Grants,Social / Cultural / Environmental / Population Health,Indigenous Peoples' Health,Aboriginal Birth Outcomes; Administrative Health Databases Linkage,"There has been a lack of data on Aboriginal (First Nations, Inuit, Métis) birth outcomes in Canada at the national-level, and a lack of population-based data on Aboriginal birth outcomes in most provinces. Available research data suggest that First Nations and Inuit birth outcomes are much worse than their non-Aboriginal counterparts. The causes and causal mediating factors are poorly understood. We have the experience in using the Statistics Canada's linked perinatal data in research of Quebec First Nations and Inuit birth outcomes. A major limitation of Statistics Canada's linked vital data is its very limited number of variables on maternal and pregnancy characteristics, therefore the inability for more in depth analyses on the causes and consequences of adverse birth outcomes. We therefore propose to explore the feasibility of Quebec administrative health databases linkage enabling potentially more in depth future studies on Quebec First Nations and Inuit birth outcomes. The major Quebec administrative data sources for this feasibility study will include vital registration database (stillbirth, live birth, infant death) of the Institut de la Statistique du Québec (ISQ), the hospital records database Med-Echo (Maintenance et Exploitation des Données pour l'Étude de la Clientèle HOspitalière) of the Quebec Ministry of Health and Social Services - le Ministère de la Santé et des Services Sociaux (MSSS), and the diagnosis/clinical service and medications databases of Quebec Medical Insurance - Régie de l'assurance maladie du Québec (RAMQ).",0 yr 9 mths,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=173151&lang=en
173153,Development of a conception cohort to study the utilization of prenatal screening,Lyon  Andrew W,"Lyon, Andrew W; Tough, Suzanne C",University of Calgary,Alberta,Canada,200809,25000.0,Catalyst Grant: Maternal and Child Health,Operating Grants,Health systems / services,"Human Development, Child and Youth Health",Administrative Data; Database Linkage; Health Services Research; Pregnancy; Prenatal Screening; Survival Analysis,"Population-based, longitudinal data that encompasses preconception, pregnancy and the post-partum period for a non-ART (assisted reproductive technology) conceived pregnancies is difficult to obtain in Canada.  This type of data is important as many events that occur before and during a pregnancy can influence its outcome.  This project aims to combine current clinical datasets from Calgary Laboratory Services, Medical Genetics, the Early Risk Assessment Clinic, the Regional Fertility Program and other participating clinics, along with birth outcome data from the Alberta Perinatal Health Program and the Alberta Congenital Anomalies Surveillance System to develop a population-based longitudinal conception cohort that includes data on the three months prior to pregnancy, pregnancy and six months post-partum.  Deterministic linkage will be used initially to link as many records as possible and probabilistic linkage based on maternal personal health number, date of birth and name will used to match the remaining records and to confirm the accuracy of the initial linkage.  Once linked, data will be de-identified and the conception cohort will be used to model the use and results of specific screening tests and assess their ability to accurately predict  adverse outcomes such as preterm birth (survival analysis) and low birth weight (logistic regression).",0 yr 9 mths,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=173153&lang=en
173158,The Feasibility of Individually Linking Children's Mental Health Service Records,Rhodes  Anne E,"Rhodes, Anne E",Unity Health Toronto,Ontario,Canada,200809,25000.0,Catalyst Grant: Maternal and Child Health,Operating Grants,Health systems / services,"Human Development, Child and Youth Health",Administrative Health Care Records; Child And Adolescent Mental Health; Menta Health Services Utilization; Record Linkage,"The purpose of this project is to assess the feasibility of linking pre-existing individual level child and adolescent data from community mental health service agencies with health care administrative records over time, including those covering inpatient hospitalization, emergency department visits and outpatient physician contacts in the province of Ontario. The knowledge gained will help tailor more comprehensive research proposals and enhance research capacity to address the impact of access and delivery of mental health services on health outcomes of vulnerable children and adolescents. 

This one year project will include exploratory work with these data bases and an investigation of accessibility and privacy issues to ascertain under what conditions linked secondary analyses would be possible and desirable. Specifically, data captured by CAFAS (Child and Adolescent Functional Assessment Scale) in Ontario will be considered in relation to the above noted administrative health care data sources housed at the Institute for Clinical Evaluative Sciences (ICES) in Ontario. The study investigators are quite familiar with these data sources and work actively with decision-makers in translating evidence into policy and practice.",0 yr 9 mths,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=173158&lang=en
173159,"Surveillance of High Risk, Vulnerable Children and Youth: Using Cutting-Edge Statistical Techniques to Inform Pediatric Mental Health Care",Rosychuk  Rhonda J,"Rosychuk, Rhonda J; Newton, Mandi S",University of Alberta,Alberta,Canada,200809,24965.0,Catalyst Grant: Maternal and Child Health,Operating Grants,Health systems / services,Health Services and Policy Research,Administrative Databases; Child And Youth; Emergency Services; Geographic Cluster Detection; Mental Health; Recurrent Event Analysis,"Eighty percent of psychiatric disorders begin when people are young. The pediatric mental health system, however, has been described as the ""orphan's orphan"" in Canadian health care, a term meant to highlight the chronic under-funding, limited service options, and lack of specially trained mental health personnel. While 15% (approximately 1.2 million) of Canadian children and youth live with a mental illness, only 1 in 6 receives necessary mental health services, leaving those untreated vulnerable to acute crises and in need of ad hoc support. Demand for mental health services in the emergency department (ED) is increasing. EDs are now a well-documented, key system entry point for families hoping to access mental health care. We will utilize a large, comprehensive, provincial database to investigate the mental health presentations made by Alberta¿s children and youth to EDs. With data spanning six years, we will describe the features of pediatric mental health ED visits and identify geographic areas that have high presentation rates using novel statistical techniques. These analyses will help target geographic areas for more detailed investigations and provide insights for health policy interventions that can improve the mental health care of Canada's children and youth.",0 yr 9 mths,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=173159&lang=en
173160,Computerization of the Québec BCG vaccination registry: quality assessment and linkage with administrative databases,Rousseau  Marie-Claude,"Rousseau, Marie-Claude","INRS - (Qu&eacute;bec, QC)",Qu&eacute;bec,Canada,200809,25000.0,Catalyst Grant: Maternal and Child Health,Operating Grants,Social / Cultural / Environmental / Population Health,"Human Development, Child and Youth Health",Administrative Databases; Bcg Vaccination; Computerization; Concordance; Linkage; Quality Assessment,"Large databases produced for administrative purposes are increasingly being considered useful to study the health of the population. The Québec BCG (Bacillus Calmette-Guérin) Vaccination Registry, currently kept at INRS-Institut Armand-Frappier, consists of approximately 4 million vaccination records from the 1920s to the mid 1990s. Alphabetical listings produced from the vaccination certificates are available in paper copy. Each vaccination record contains information on child's surname, child's given name, father's given name, birth date, sex, pre-vaccination test (type of test, date, and reaction in millimetres), current vaccination (date, mode of administration), date of prior vaccination, and medical institution. Computerization to convert these alphabetical paper listings into an electronic database is currently underway. Our study will assess the quality and accuracy of the computerized BCG registry. This will be done in two steps: I) comparison of a sample (5,000) of the computerized database with records found in the paper listings in order to determine the accuracy of the computerization process; II) comparison of a sample (5,000) of the vaccination certificates (raw data) with the computerized registry in order to document the accuracy of the final database as compared to the raw data. Discrepancies will be noted and errors manually corrected. We will determine, for a subset of 2,800 records from the computerized BCG vaccination registry, the proportion of successful record linkages with the birth registry and administrative health databases from the Canadian province of Québec. Finally, we will evaluate the availability and quality of information on medical diagnoses, and on variables extracted from the birth registry such as gestational age, birth order, birth weight, and mother's age. This study will contribute to improve the quality of population health research based on administrative databases, a very useful and relatively inexpensive approach.",0 yr 9 mths,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=173160&lang=en
173161,"Cesarean delivery on maternal request in Ontario, Canada.",Yang  Qiuying,"Yang, Qiuying",Ottawa Hospital Research Institute,Ontario,Canada,200809,24500.0,Catalyst Grant: Maternal and Child Health,Operating Grants,Social / Cultural / Environmental / Population Health,Population and Public Health,Birth Outcomes; Cesarean Delivery Maternal Request; Incidence; Risk Factors,"Cesarean delivery on maternal request is defined as a primary cesarean delivery at maternal request in the absence of any medical or obstetric indication by The National Institutes of Health and American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists. A potential benefit of cesarean delivery on maternal request is decreased risk of hemorrhage for the mother. Potential risks of cesarean delivery on maternal request include a longer maternal hospital stay, an increased risk of respiratory problems for the baby, and greater complications in subsequent pregnancies, including uterine rupture and placental implantation problems. However, the magnitude of cesarean delivery on maternal request is difficult to quantify. There is insufficient evidence to evaluate fully the benefits and risks of cesarean delivery on maternal request compared with planned vaginal delivery, and more research is needed. The proposed study will use the Niday database which is part of the Ontario Perinatal Surveillance System and includes more than 95% of births in Ontario. The Database includes information on the number of women giving birth and babies born in the province, maternal and prenatal factors, health services factors, intrapartum interventions, birth outcomes and infant health. We will identify characteristic factors related to cesarean delivery on request and compare the outcomes between cesarean delivery on maternal request and planned vaginal delivery. Clinicians would benefit from strong evidence regarding risks and benefits, evidence that is crucial to guiding policy making with regard to cesarean delivery on maternal request. If this study finds that no major differences between primary cesarean delivery on maternal request and planned vaginal delivery, a decreasing cesarean section rate will relieve an economic burden on highly stressed medical systems and increase patient satisfaction.",0 yr 9 mths,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=173161&lang=en
173162,Predictors of Health and Developmental Trajectories among Aboriginal Preschool Aged Children in Canada: Effects of Family and Community Level Characteristics,Wilk  Piotr,"Wilk, Piotr",Western University (Ontario),Ontario,Canada,200809,21352.0,Catalyst Grant: Maternal and Child Health,Operating Grants,Social / Cultural / Environmental / Population Health,"Human Development, Child and Youth Health",Aboriginal People; Contextual Analysis; Early Childhood; Growth Curve Modeling; Health And Developmental Trajectories; Multilevel Analysis,"The overall purpose of our research is to examine the differences in major health indicators between Aboriginal and non-Aboriginal children, as well as among sub-populations of Aboriginal children. To this end, we identify a model of Aboriginal child health that consists of three broad conceptual categories of health determinants: community conditions, family environment, and child characteristics. By placing a strong emphasis on the community-specific determinants of health, the model provides an alternative paradigm that accentuates the role of geographic, cultural, socio-economic, and political contexts of the research on Aboriginal child health. We propose to test the model by conducting a secondary data analysis on survey data files and administrative databases that contain information on Aboriginal children, their families, and the communities in which they live. The objective of the current phase of the project is to conduct exploratory work on the available data sources, determine appropriate techniques for data analysis, and construct a team of researchers and stakeholders. The results of this research will provide communities and governments the necessary information to identify priorities and set standards for programs and policies to enhance the health and well-being of Aboriginal children.",0 yr 9 mths,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=173162&lang=en
173251,Influence of Omega-3 Long Chain Polyunsaturated Fatty Acids and  Cyclooxygenase on the Progression of Diabetic Retinopathy,Sapieha  Przemyslaw (Mike) S,"Sapieha, Przemyslaw (Mike) S","Harvard Medical School (Boston, Massachusetts)",Massachusetts,United States of America,200810,66667.0,CIHR Fellowship,Fellowship Programs,Biomedical,"Nutrition, Metabolism and Diabetes",Angiogenesis; Cyclooxygenase 2; Diabetes; Omega-3 Fatty Acid; Retinopathy; Translational Research,"Diabetic retinopathy (DR) is the most common complication of diabetes, afflicting over 90% of persons with this disease and ultimately leads to blindness. Characterized by an initial phase of vascular death, followed by deregulated neovascularization, DR presents inflammatory components. Relevantly, lipid (fat) based molecules act as effectors of inflammation and angiogenesis (new vessel formation). Particularly potent are certain long chain polyunsaturated fatty acids (LCPUFAs) such as the Omega-6, which once metabolized by the cyclooxygenase (COX) enzyme, generate pro-inflammatory/ pro-angiogenic mediators. Conversely, an anti-inflammatory and anti-angiogenic influence is found with intake of Omega-3-LCPUFAs. As LCPUFA tissue status is modified by and dependent on dietary intake, these nutrients are reasonable choices for interventions to prevent DR with foods that are not usually consumed in the Western diet. 
The proposed study is designed to: 
i) Evaluate the beneficial effects of diets rich in Omega-3 LCPUFA versus those rich in Omega-6 LCPUFA on DR outcome in a mouse model of DR. COX inhibition will be investigated in conjunction with above-mentioned diets.
ii) Map out mechanisms behind DR by determining for each treatment, the gene expression profile of specific factors related to lipid metabolism, inflammation and angiogenesis. 
iii) Predict other complementary pharmacological interventions by defining molecular pathways involved in DR and determining if they are suppressed by Omega-3 LCPUFA rich diets. Angiogenic pathways against which drugs exist (TNFa, iNOS, VEGF, and MMP) will be tested.
We anticipate establishing the approach of lipid intervention in DR and finding new lipid-based compounds as surrogate markers of disease. The potential impact of this work on DR is great since nutritional interventions are safe, inexpensive and readily put into practice.",1 yr 4 mths,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=173251&lang=en
173303,Identification and characterization of pathogen-associated genes through large-scale bioinformatics analysis,Ho-Sui  Shannan J,"Ho-Sui, Shannan J","Simon Fraser University (Burnaby, B.C.)",British Columbia,Canada,200810,90000.0,CIHR Fellowship,Fellowship Programs,Biomedical,Infection and Immunity,Anti-Infectives; Bioinformatics; Comparative Analysis; Drug Discovery; Genomics; Infectious Disease; Pathogenomics; Virulence,"Bacterial infections account for a significant proportion of global mortality rates. The emergence of bacterial pathogens resistant to multiple drugs presents a crisis in healthcare, and has resulted in urgent calls for novel therapies. The vast majority of available antibiotics inhibit cellular functions that are essential. This approach may harm the healthy, natural microbial flora and imposes selective pressure that fosters the growth of antibiotic-resistant strains.  Thus, there is growing interest in identifying bacterial drug targets that are ""anti-infective"" rather than antibiotic, since such targets will be more likely specific to pathogenic bacteria and may be subject to less selection for drug resistance. 

As part of the Bioinformatics for Combating Infectious Diseases (BCID) Project, I am therefore developing computational methods to aid identification of ""pathogen-associated"" genes that may be suitable anti-infective drug targets. Preliminary data for select pathogens indicates that several promising hypothetical proteins of unknown function are identified by searching completely sequenced bacterial genomes for proteins present in pathogenic bacteria but absent from non-pathogens. I aim to further improve the accuracy of the algorithm for identifying such genes/proteins. I also aim to develop a flexible database of such genes that will include additional information about each protein to aid their assessment as drug targets. 

My initial efforts will focus on two important pathogens: Pseudomonas aeruginosa, an opportunistic pathogen that is noted for its intrinsic antimicrobial resistance and diverse metabolic capacity, and Mycobacterium tuberculosis, the causative agent of tuberculosis noted for acquiring multiple drug resistance. My work will lead to the creation of a user-friendly database of potential protein drug targets, and the development of methods that are broadly applicable to other microbial pathogens.",2 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=173303&lang=en
173330,"Total synthesis, analog generation and oncology testing of the kapakahines.",Lewis  Chad A,"Lewis, Chad A","Scripps Research Institute (La Jolla, CA)",California,United States of America,200810,100000.0,CIHR Fellowship,Fellowship Programs,Biomedical,Cancer Research,Kapakahine; Leukemia; Mechanism; Natural Product; Oncology; Organic Chemistry; Synthesis,The Kapakahines represent a rare-class of tryptophan containing natural products that have been shown to have encouraging preliminary anti-leukemia activity.  The proposed research is to produce useful quantities of the natural product as well as several analogs which will then be applied for testing to examine the structure-activity relationship.  The kapakahine structure contains several possible branching points to which analogs can be generated efficiently.,2 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=173330&lang=en
173335,The Effects of Ambient Air Pollution and Nickel Nanoparticles on the Cardiopulmonary System and Endothelial Progenitor Cells.,Liberda  Eric N,"Liberda, Eric N","New York University (New York, NY)",New York,United States of America,200810,81000.0,CIHR Doctoral Research Award,Studentship Programs,Biomedical,Circulatory and Respiratory Health,Air Pollution; Atherosclerosis; Cardiovascular; Endothelium; Health Effects; Inflammation; Nanoparticles; Particulate Matter; Progenitor Cells; Pulmonary,"The association between heart disease and high particulate matter pollution days has been demonstrated in several epidemiological studies. Additionally, in recent years, nanoparticle production and use in commercial products has increased exponentially. Currently, there is a lack of mechanistic data available regarding how particulate matter and nanoparticles exert their effects on the pulmonary system, the cardiovascular system, and endothelial progenitor cells. In response to the ubiquity of human air pollution exposure and the propensity of nanoparticles in the built environment, this doctoral project shall determine the mechanisms by which nanoparticles and particulate matter exert their effects on the cardiovascular and pulmonary systems, and affect the development and progression of atherosclerosis. Various rural and urban city air will be sampled in order to develop concentrated air pollutants which will be used for the study. Novel tools such as murine specific ultrasound machines, confocal wire myography systems, molecular biology techniques, and specialized exposure chambers will also be used. The results of this doctoral dissertation will be used to further cardiopulmonary and endothelial progenitor cell research in academic as well as clinical settings.",3 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=173335&lang=en
173337,The extension of the COACH prompting system to nutrition-related activities among older adults,Mihailidis  Alex,"Mihailidis, Alex",Toronto Rehabilitation Institute-UHN,Ontario,Canada,200809,222000.0,Other: Canada-UK Aging Initiative,Operating Grants,,,Aging; Assistive Devices; Austism; Cognition; Memory Aids; Smart Homes; Supportive Environments; Technology; Ubiquitous Computing,,3 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=173337&lang=en
173355,Working late: Strategies to enhance productive and healthy environments for the older workforce - the Canadian context,Gien  Lan T,"Gien, Lan T",Memorial University of Newfoundland,Newfoundland and Labrador,Canada,200809,222000.0,Other: Canada-UK Aging Initiative,Operating Grants,,,,,3 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=173355&lang=en
173356,Development and validation of a questionnaire to measure the psychosocial impact of assistive technologies for continence in elderly individuals,Jutai  Jeffrey W,"Jutai, Jeffrey W",University of Ottawa,Ontario,Canada,200809,225000.0,Other: Canada-UK Aging Initiative,Operating Grants,,,,,3 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=173356&lang=en
173357,Regulation of follicle-stimulating hormone synthesis by steroidogenic factor-1 (SF-1) and beta-catenin,Soto  Paolete,"Soto, Paolete",McGill University,Qu&eacute;bec,Canada,200810,45000.0,Fellowship - CIHR/Rx&amp;D - Wyeth Pharmaceuticals Research Program,Fellowship Programs,Biomedical,"Human Development, Child and Youth Health",Beta-Catenin; Follicle Stimulating Hormone; Gonadotrope; Gonadotropin Releasing Hormone; Infertility; Menstrual Cycle; Pituitary; Reproduction; Steroidogenic Factor-1; Transcription,"The pituitary gland, which sits at the base of the brain, synthesizes two hormones necessary for reproductive function: follicle stimulating hormone (FSH) and luteinizing hormone (LH). As its name indicates, FSH stimulates the development and maturation of ovarian follicles. Follicles are structures in the ovary in which the eggs (or oocytes) mature and from which the oocytes are ovulated each month. LH stimulates ovulation. The precise control of FSH synthesis and secretion is critical for reproduction. Perturbations in FSH production or action can and do lead to infertility.  Suppressed or elevated FSH levels are then observed in women seeking fertility treatment.  In many of these cases, the underlying cause of altered FSH is unknown or idiopathic.  The primary objective of the research proposed here is to understand how FSH is normally synthesized by specialized cells of the pituitary gland.  This information will aid in the identification of causes of, and therefore treatments for, some forms of idiopathic infertility.",2 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=173357&lang=en
173396,Prediction of compound synergy in the treatment of inflammatory lung disease,Kemmer  Danielle,"Kemmer, Danielle",McGill University,Qu&eacute;bec,Canada,200810,22500.0,Fellowship - PA: Respiratory Health - CIHR/CLA/GSK,Fellowship Programs,Biomedical,Circulatory and Respiratory Health,Bioinformatics; Functional Genomics; Gene Expression; Inflammatory Lung Disease; Microarray,"To date there exist no treatments for inflammatory lung diseases such as cystic fibrosis (CF) and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) and standard drugs often fail due to drug resistance, insufficient potency and minimal efficacy. However, combinatorial therapies, where several compounds are used simultaneously, have proven invaluable in the effective treatment of various complex diseases where the overall therapeutic benefit of the drug combination is greater than the sum of positive effects of each drug in isolation.
Here we propose a novel approach to predict combinatorial treatments for inflammatory lung diseases based on the analysis of altered gene expression profiles identified in cells treated with individual drugs. With this method, it will be possible to take a shortcut to the identification of potential multi-component therapies, bypassing tedious trial and error experiments testing exponential numbers of drug combinations. 
First, we will monitor altered gene expression after drug treatment and construct compound-specific patterns from genome-wide experiments. Through the application of bioinformatics/statistical methods we will predict putative synergistic compounds either through similarity or complementation of the cellular patterns generated for a set of CF-specific drugs. Second, we will extend the approach to COPD and adapt a novel screening method to identify compounds therapeutically active in cells from COPD patient lung tissue, generate cellular patterns for each drug identified and apply our statistical method for combinatorial treatment prediction. 
Decomposing cellular drug responses into specific patterns and developing statistical methods for the comparison of these patterns will allow us to a) identify synergistic compounds with enhanced therapeutic potential for the treatment of multiple inflammatory lung diseases, and b) elucidate underlying unique and common mechanisms between multiple disorders exhibiting related symptoms.",2 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=173396&lang=en
173398,Airway smooth muscle stiffness and airway hyperresponsiveness in asthma,Bosse  Ynuk,"Bosse, Ynuk",University of British Columbia,British Columbia,Canada,200810,90000.0,CIHR Fellowship,Fellowship Programs,Biomedical,Circulatory and Respiratory Health,Airway Hyperresponsiveness; Airway Smooth Muscle; Asthma; Contraction; Cytoskeleton; Force; Length Adaptation; Signal Transduction Pathways; Stiffness,"The muscle surrounding the airways is the final common pathway involved in the airway narrowing that characterizes all types of asthma. Recently, bronchial thermoplasty, an intervention that partially removes the muscle from the airways, was shown to cause long-term improvements in the symptoms of asthmatic patients. This intervention is limited by its invasive nature, numerous side effects, and by the fact that it targets only larger airways (>3 mm) that are accessible with a bronchoscope. However, the result of these clinical trials clearly demonstrate that less invasive therapy capable of targeting the airway muscle of large and small airways would be an effective therapy for asthma and could reduce or eradicate the symptoms of this disease. 
Our group has recently demonstrated that cyclical stretching of airway muscle reduces its force. This implies that the cyclical stretching of the muscle, which is seen in normal breathing and periodic deep inspiration, is protective against excessive airway narrowing. Our preliminary results suggest that the muscle becomes stiffer when repeatedly stimulated to contract. We propose that the increased muscle stiffness, caused by chemicals released during allergic inflammatory reactions in the airways, reduces the cyclical stretching induced by normal breathing and periodic deep inspiration. This reduced stretching, in turn, increases muscle force and contributes to the exaggerated airway lumen narrowing observed in asthmatics. A better understanding of the mechanisms regulating the stiffness of the airway muscle may shed light on the origin of the exaggerated bronchospasm in asthmatics. Ultimately, these results may lead to the identification of a new method of treatment for asthma and an alternative option for the unmet need of patients unresponsive to current treatments.",2 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=173398&lang=en
173423,Nitric oxide signaling in the innate immune responses,Silva  Elizabeth A,"Silva, Elizabeth A",University of California (San Francisco),California,United States of America,200810,129167.0,CIHR Fellowship,Fellowship Programs,Biomedical,Infection and Immunity,Anti-Microbial Peptides; Bacteria; Cell Biology; Drosophila; Genetics; Hemocytes; Infection; Innate Immunity; Nitric Oxide; Signaling,"Our first line of defense against any invading pathogen, whether it is a bacterium, fungus or virus, is the innate immune system. This remarkable system is not only able to recognize the presence of an invader, it is able to find and destroy it, and even communicate with other tissues and organs, thus recruiting other parts of the body to the fight. However, this communication requires a delicate balance. By under-responding, the immune system leaves the body open to the spread of infection, while over-response leads to inflammation. I will investigate the remarkable intricacies of the immune response by studying the innate immune system of the fruit-fly, Drosophila. Why the fruit-fly? Humans and flies are more similar to each other than they might appear. Both must grow and develop from a single cell into an adult with specialized organs and tissues, and both must employ a specialized system for avoiding disease and infection. Remarkably, both humans and flies use the same basic set of genes to do this. By studying the simpler, fly version of the innate immune system we can gain insight into how the human system works. Moreover, unlike in humans, we can elegantly add, remove and manipulate genes in flies to observe the resulting effects. I will take advantage of these attributes to understand how the various components of the immune system, including different organs and tissues, communicate with each other in response to infection. Like many systems, the innate immune system is greater than the sum of its parts. This work will provide crucial insights into how the innate immune system functions as a whole, an endeavor impossible outside of simpler model animals, such as the fly.",2 yrs 7 mths,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=173423&lang=en
173481,Identification of DNA-binding specificities for transcription factor pairs,Van Bakel  Harm,"Van Bakel, Harm",University of Toronto,Ontario,Canada,200810,75000.0,CIHR Fellowship,Fellowship Programs,Biomedical,Genetics,Bioinformatics; Dimers; Dna Binding Motifs; Gene Regulation; Genetics; Genomics; Microarrays; Sequencing; Transcription; Transcription Factors,"DNA is often called the code of life and key elements in this code are genes, which provide the blueprints for making all proteins that form the building blocks needed to construct living cells. In recent years the full sequence of the human genome has been deciphered and the location of most genes is now known. An important question that remains, however, is how these genes are regulated in time and place. For example, genes that encode proteins needed to digest food must be turned on (expressed) in the gut, but not the brain. Cells therefore contain specialized proteins, known as transcription factors, which can selectively turn genes on or off by binding nearby in the genome. To find their targets, each of these factors recognizes a short unique sequence in the DNA. One complication is that these short motifs can occur at many places in the genome, often far outnumbering the genes that need to be expressed. One solution that cells use to increase the specificity of regulation is by letting transcription factors team up. A pair of transcription factors requires two motifs occurring together, with constraints on spacing and orientation, allowing for more precise gene targeting.
 Previous work in the Hughes lab has identified the individual DNA-binding motifs of a large number of transcription factors. However, evidence suggests that many of these factors actually work as pairs and therefore this project aims to identify their joint binding motifs. To do this we will let pairs of transcription factors combine together in a test tube and expose them to a mix of short DNA molecules that contain the motifs bound by each factor separately in all possible spacings and orientations. Deciphering which sequences transcription factor pairs bind will not only help us to answer basic questions of where and when genes are expressed, but also help to ultimately understand why this regulation sometimes goes awry in diseases such as cancer and during embryonic development.",1 yr 8 mths,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=173481&lang=en
173487,Molecular connections of FAK to ovarian cancer cell survival and tumor progression,Lawson  Christine,"Lawson, Christine",University of California (San Diego),California,United States of America,200810,150000.0,CIHR Fellowship,Fellowship Programs,Biomedical,Cancer Research,Angiogenesis; Cell Migration And Survival; Fak; Integrins; Metastasis; Ovarian Cancer; Signal Transduction; Src; Tumor Invasion; Tyrosines Kinases,"Ovarian cancer is the fifth most diagnosed and common cause of cancer-related death in women and the most frequent cause of death from a gynaecologic malignancy. In average there are 2600 new cases and 1500 deaths each year due to ovarian cancer in Canada. The lifetime probability of a women developing ovarian cancer is 1 in 69 and of a women dying from this cancer is 1 in 88. Despite advances in surgical and chemotherapeutic approaches, the resistance of ovarian cancer cells to traditional cytotoxic agents is a major obstacle for treatment and better therapeutic approaches for ovarian cancer are needed. The research project proposed is to study how ovarian cancer spreads from the primary tumor to other sites in the body. Key steps in this process are the acquisition of a motile phenotype and the ability of cancer cells to survive upon detachment from the primary tumor. Enhanced cell migration enables the cancer to invade into surrounding tissue or vasculature, and augmented cell survival enables cancer cell growth in other parts of the body. Particularly, the research will be focused on the molecular signalling events that control cell migration and survival in ovarian cancer. By understanding why ovarian cancer cells become invasive and migrate to other tissues, we will be able to target and block this process and design better treatments to restrict the spread of ovarian cancer through the body.",3 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=173487&lang=en
173503,Characterization of the roles and molecular mechanism of adrenomedullin1 and its receptor in hematopoiesis,Nag  Kakon,"Nag, Kakon",McMaster University,Ontario,Canada,200810,90000.0,CIHR Fellowship,Fellowship Programs,Biomedical,Cancer Research,Hematopoiesis From Human Embryonic Stem Cell,"Embryonic stem cells (ESC), as the name indicates, are derived from embryos. They have unlimited self-renewal capacity and they can transform to any type of cell in an animal. Therefore, they have been considered as an important clinical resource for the treatment of many diseases e.g., blood cancer. Human ESC (hESC) have been established as a suitable source of blood formation in a laboratory system with the treatment of specified bio-molecules but it is not efficient enough. Therefore, discovery of novel bio-molecules, which regulate the blood-cell formation from hESC, and understanding of the relevant mechanism will provide novel means for the efficient manipulation of hESC that ultimately will lead to the effective treatment for blood-related diseases. Our study revealed that adrenomedullin 1 (AM1), a multifunctional peptide hormone, and its receptor system, which is a combination of calcitonin receptor-like receptor (CLR) and receptor activity modifying protein (RAMP) 2, are linked with the blood formation in zebrafish, because forced inhibition of AM1 receptor activity in zebrafish embryo developed blood-less animal. We further revealed that the blood-forming function of AM1-signaling pathway is also conserved in human since the blood-forming tissues express high level of CLR, and AM1 treatment augmented hESC-derived blood-cell formation in laboratory condition via Notch-signaling pathway, an established signaling pathway related to blood-cell formation from hESC. Based on our current data we hypothesized that AM1 synergistically works with other known blood-cell forming factors. However, further study is required to reveal the underlying molecular circuitry of the phenomenon. Our discovery that AM1 and its receptor system potentiate blood-cell formation from hESC is very influential and novel information for the treatment of blood-related diseases.",2 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=173503&lang=en
173508,The investigation of post-translational mechanisms regulating the Hippo pathway,Sopko  Richelle L,"Sopko, Richelle L",Lunenfeld-Tanenbaum Research Institute  (Toronto),Ontario,Canada,200810,135000.0,CIHR Fellowship,Fellowship Programs,Biomedical,Cancer Research,Cancer; Cell Biology; Cell Communication; Cell Cycle; Development; Genetic Epistasis; Growth Control; Molecular Biology; Protein Phosphorylation; Signal Transduction,"Organ-specific size and shape is determined by the developmental coordination of cell proliferation and cell death. Perturbations of these processes are observed in disease states caused by aberrant growth such as cancer. One of the cues governing normal tissue growth is output from the Hippo signaling pathway. Genes involved in the Hippo signaling pathway were originally identified by their ability to suppress tissue overgrowth in the fruit fly and the association of Hippo pathway mutations with pancreatic, liver, breast, lung, and cervical cancers underscores the relevance of further study of this pathway. By characterizing interactions among Hippo pathway components, I aim to dissect the precise mechanisms by which this pathway contributes to the normal regulation of tissue growth, cell division, and cell death. Given the conservation of growth control mechanisms between fruit fly and human, efforts to unravel defective Hippo signaling in the fruit fly will undoubtedly have important implications for our understanding of organismal development as well as growth abnormalities such as human cancers.",3 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=173508&lang=en
173526,On the role of the cortical motor system in producing and perceiving language in functionally significant situations throughout adulthood: a combined fMRI/TMS study,Tremblay  Pascale,"Tremblay, Pascale",University of Chicago (Illinois),Illinois,United States of America,200810,100000.0,CIHR Fellowship,Fellowship Programs,Biomedical,"Neurosciences, Mental Health and Addiction",Conversation; Cortex; Cortical Motor System; Functional Mri; Language Processing; Naturalistic Language; Speech Perception; Speech Production; Transcranial Magnetic Stimulation,"Language is one of the most complex and most essential abilities of humankind. It is for this reason that language disorders have devastating consequences on quality of life. Understanding how the brain recovers language functions following stroke is of tremendous importance to develop behavioural and pharmacological interventions that will facilitate recovery and enhance patients' quality of life. In order to understand how the brain recovers language functions from an injury, it is crucial to first understand how the brain processes language when it is intact. It has been shown recently that stroke patients with motor deficits can improve their motor skills by observing other people producing movements. This important finding demonstrates that motor and perceptual systems are more closely connected than was long held. The goal of this research program is therefore to examine the relationship between the brain systems that support language production and perception in healthy participants of different ages (young and elderly adults). Using the most up-to-date brain imaging techniques, we will study the manner in which the brain produces and perceives language in the context of face-to-face and telephone conversation. Conversation is a complex activity, which involves listening (perception) and talking (production), and, in the case of face-to-face conversation, it also involves looking at the other person. Much of current research on language focuses on simple tasks that have no direct parallel in normal life. By focusing on more natural uses of language, the current research project will provide unique information concerning the manner in which the brain perceives and produces language in different contexts and at different ages, and will allow us to examine the overlap between these two systems. The importance of this information for the development of a theory of neurological rehabilitation that is grounded in basic neuroscience cannot be overstated.",2 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=173526&lang=en
173553,Creation and evaluation of novel adeno-associated virus vectors by directed molecular evolution for gene therapy treatment of hemophilia B,Valdmanis  Paul N,"Valdmanis, Paul N",Stanford University (California),California,United States of America,200810,150000.0,CIHR Fellowship,Fellowship Programs,Biomedical,Genetics,Adeno-Associated Virus; Dna Shuffling; Factor Ix; Gene Expression; Gene Therapy; Hemophilia; Human Genetics; Liver Disease; Viral Integration,"Gene therapy is an approach to identify cells that lack a particular protein and introduce genes that will express this missing protein thus correcting the deficiency and disease state.  Hemophilia is an attractive disease for this approach as levels of the Factor IX protein that are lost need only be replaced to 1% of their normal circulating state in order to prevent the severe complications resulting from the impaired ability to clot blood.  Several viral vectors have been isolated for this approach each with their own strengths and limitations.  In particular, the adverse features of vector therapy must be addressed before they can be successfully implemented in human clinical trials including preventing integration of the vector in essential sites of the human genome and avoiding a massive immune response when the vector is administered.  The strategy which is proposed is to create new vectors that are a combination of fragments of the existing vectors.  A battery of tests can then be performed in established rodent and canine models to determine the function of each section of the vectors and to select the vector that meets the criteria for optimal treatment in hemophilia.  Creating an AAV vector that is tailored to prevent the adverse effects while maintaining maximal delivery and expression of the target gene is an essential process with profound implications.  This has the potential to improve the lives of the approximately 1 in 25,000 males who are affected with hemophilia B.  The techniques that are developed here also have the added benefit of being applied to target several other diseases with a strong identified genetic component.",3 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=173553&lang=en
173563,Peaks of ability as a subtyping tool for the autistic spectrum,Lehoux  Catherine,"Lehoux, Catherine",H&ocirc;pital Rivi&egrave;re-des-Prairies (Montr&eacute;al),Qu&eacute;bec,Canada,200810,90000.0,CIHR Fellowship,Fellowship Programs,Clinical,"Neurosciences, Mental Health and Addiction",Asperger Syndrome; Autism; Categorization; Cognition,"All autistic spectrum individuals do not have the same clinical strengths and limitations. Autism is often associated with enhanced perceptual abilities, while a developmental trajectory of advanced language abilities appears to better characterize what is called ""Asperger Syndrome"". It is unclear, however, whether these two syndromes represent distinct diagnostic categories or are on a continuum of severity. More precisely, is there a qualitatively distinct subgroup of individuals with Asperger syndrome characteristics, or what is called ""Asperger syndrome"" only represents a ""milder"" form of autism? This question is of prime importance, since if there are distinct subgroups of syndromes within the autistic spectrum, there is likely to be: i) distinct causes (e.g. distinct genetic variations); ii) distinct treatment options according to the strengths and limitations of the individual; and iii) distinct outcome in terms of everyday life functioning, for instance, in terms of professional orientations. The current project is aimed at providing arguments for or against the hypothesis of an Asperger syndrome entity within the autistic spectrum by using a data analysis approach specifically devised to investigate the existence of subcategories of individuals within a larger clinical entity (taxometric analyses). This project will be held at the Center of Excellence for Pervasive Developmental Disorder of University de Montréal (CETEDUM), with the Hôpital Rivière-des-Prairies internationally renowned specialists of autism (principal investigator: Dr Laurent Mottron). This project will thus benefit from careful and exhaustive evaluations of cognitive and behavioral strengths and limitations of more than four hundred patients with an autistic spectrum diagnosis.",2 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=173563&lang=en
173586,Sensory contributions to motor deficits after stroke: What is the role of the unaffected sensory cortex in motor recovery?,Meehan  Sean K,"Meehan, Sean K",University of British Columbia,British Columbia,Canada,200810,90000.0,CIHR Fellowship,Fellowship Programs,Clinical,"Neurosciences, Mental Health and Addiction",Diffusion Tensor Imaging; Learning; Magnetic Resonance Imaging; Motor; Rehabilitation; Sensorimotor Deficits; Sensory; Stroke; Training; Transcranial Magnetic Stimulaiton,"Movement related deficits after stroke are extremely common. It has been shown that deficits are related to an imbalance between the stroke affected and non-affected sides of the brain. Past research has focused on the possibility that hyperexcitability of the non-affected motor cortex furthers movement related disability after stroke. Constraining the unaffected limb has been associated with functional recovery of the affected limb, perhaps by reducing this imbalance. However, the mechanisms associated with these changes is unknown. Recently, studies mimicking constraint of the unaffected limb by numbing the non-affected hand, either by restricting blood flow or application of a local anesthetic, show transient increases in motor ability in the affected hand. While numbing reduces movement of the affected limb it also reduces the amount of sensory information arriving at the brain from the non-affected limb. It is likely that this reduction in sensory information changes the interaction between the two hemispheres via connections between the sensory and motor cortices that are essential for accurate movements, yet very little research has investigated the role of the non-affected sensory cortex. The purpose of the proposed research is to investigate how changes in non-affected sensory cortex influence sensorimotor processing in the affected cortex and whether these changes can be consolidated with motor learning. In contrast to past work, we will alter sensory processing in the non-affected cortex at the level of the brain using transcranial magnetic stimulation rather than in the periphery by numbing the hand. Importantly, understanding whether improved motor ability following sensory disruption in the non-affected hemisphere is mediated at the level of sensory cortex will allow rehabilitation interventions for individuals with stroke to be refined and improved. Our findings may offer a novel method with which to stimulate motor recovery after stroke.",2 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=173586&lang=en
173587,Identification of Matriptase-2 natural substrates & cleavage specificity in Anemia by Proteomics Approach,Barr&eacute;  Olivier,"Barré, Olivier",University of British Columbia,British Columbia,Canada,200810,90000.0,CIHR Fellowship,Fellowship Programs,Biomedical,Genetics,Anemia; Degradomics; Iron Homeostasis; Knock-Out Mouse; Proteomics,"Iron is an essential nutrient for all living organisms: it is necessary for oxygen transport using the carrier protein hemoglobin and in metabolic reactions. Iron deficiency can lead to several severe pathologies such as anemia, while in excess it is toxic. Globally, anemia affects 1.62 billion people worldwide and half of which are preschool-age children. Matriptase-2 is a recently identified member of the type II transmembrane serine protease (TTSP) family. It is an enzyme predominantly located at the surface of liver cells and is capable of cutting other proteins to generate peptide fragments. Recent studies suggest that these peptide fragments are able to modulate iron balance and in an overactive state can lead to anemia. 
My working hypothesis is that Matriptase-2 is an essential regulator of iron homeostasis through its generation of novel signaling peptides. To confirm this hypothesis, Matriptase-2 targets in an anemia mouse model will be identified. Genetically modified mice that do not produce Matriptase-2, and their wild-type counterparts (control) will be employed. A comparison between the proteins contained in the outside environment of liver cells from each mouse strain will identify differences specific to the presence of Matriptase-2. To enrich for peptide fragments, a technique developed in our laboratory known as TAILS (Terminal Amine Isotopic Labeling of Substrate) will be applied. TAILS utilizes an in-house developed polymer to specifically select isotopically labeled N-termini. This enrichment will allow a better and specific identification of cleaved neo N-termini of natural protease substrates by mass spectrometry. Potential substrates will be identified and the direct action of the protease will be confirmed using standard biochemical techniques. The identification of the mechanisms by which Matriptase-2 influences the regulation of iron homeostasis will inform the rational development new drugs for iron deficiency and toxicity treatment.",2 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=173587&lang=en
173591,Nov (CCN3) regulation of hematopoietic stem cells,Stewart  Morag H,"Stewart, Morag H",John Radcliffe Hospital (Oxford),,United Kingdom,200810,150000.0,CIHR Fellowship,Fellowship Programs,Biomedical,Cancer Research,Cell Sorting; Cellular Interactions; Differentiation; Extrinsic Regulation; Human Hematopoietic Stem Cells; Leukemia; Receptors; Self-Renewal; Signaling; Transplantation,"Hematopoietic stem cells (HSCs) are very rare cells that are found in the bone marrow of adults and in umbilical cord blood that act to maintain an individual's blood and immune system throughout their life.  HSCs divide following stress or injury, such as disease or blood loss, to help restore balance to the blood system. When necessary, HSCs divide; producing at least one identical copy of themselves to maintain the HSC population in addition to replenishing depleted blood cells in the case of blood loss, or increasing the number of blood cells in the case of infection. The signals in the body that cause HSCs to divide in this fashion are currently unknown.  Certain diseases, such as leukemia, require that the blood system be replaced by means of a bone marrow transplant.  The bone marrow, and the HSCs within it, comes from a donor therefore there is a chance of transplant failure.  Banking and using one's own HSC-rich cord blood would avoid donor transplant failure, unfortunately, there are not enough HSCs in an individual's cord blood to be used for transplantation and we currently do not have the ability to expand HSCs outside of the body.  The ability to culture and expand these rare HSCs would allow for transplantation of an individual's cells and would replace the current need for donor bone marrow, which is difficult and painful to obtain.  A protein called Nov was recently shown to expand HSCs in culture without causing them to loose their ability to reestablish the entire blood system.  It is unclear, however, how or what Nov is doing to cause this expansion of HSCs.  We will determine how Nov is affecting HSCs.  This will be done initially outside of the body in tissue culture and eventually using animal models.  If we can understand how Nov causes HSC expansion, we could directly and positively impact the expansion of cord blood HSCs for use in transplants and anti-leukemia therapies.",3 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=173591&lang=en
173593,"Identification of Novel Granzyme B Substrates and Characterization of Critical Residues of a Granzyme B Inhibitor, Serpina3n.",Marcet Palacios  Marcelo,"Marcet Palacios, Marcelo",University of Alberta,Alberta,Canada,200810,90000.0,CIHR Fellowship,Fellowship Programs,Biomedical,Infection and Immunity,Apoptosis; Autoimmune Diseases; Molecular Biology Techniques; Protein Synthesis And Purification,"Granzyme B (GrB) is a protein released by a specific type of white blood cell called a cytotoxic T lymphocyte (CTL). CTL cells recognize tumor and virus infected cells and destroy these cells by releasing GrB. This is one of the strategies used by the immune system to limit the spread of infection. After GrB enters the infected cells, it works by activating a sequence of reactions inside the cell that ultimately results in DNA destruction and cell death. Proteins that inhibit GrB are excellent candidates as drugs that suppress the immune system. The first goal of my project is to engineer an enhanced GrB inhibitor by combining the structural components of these inhibitors that confer the greatest suppressive effects. Another goal of my research is to identify new targets of GrB to further define the exact sequence of reactions downstream of GrB. This new understanding will generate potential drug targets in the treatment of autoimmune diseases such as multiple sclerosis and transplant rejection. 

    Our laboratory first discovered GrB in 1985, and delineated this pathway in the involvement of CTL killing of infected cells. More recently, we described a new GrB inhibitor called serpina3n. I plan to expand on the knowledge and expertise we have generated in this field by pursuing the GrB research as it relates to health and disease.",2 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=173593&lang=en
173614,Characterization of the molecular links between apolipoprotein B mRNA translation and hepatic insulin resistance,Su  Qiaozhu,"Su, Qiaozhu",University of Toronto,Ontario,Canada,200810,131250.0,CIHR Fellowship,Fellowship Programs,Clinical,"Nutrition, Metabolism and Diabetes",5' Utr; Apolipoprotein B; Diabetes; Endoplasmic Reticulum Stress; Heart Disease; Hepatic Insulin Resistance; Insulin Signalling Pathway; Protein 110; Translational Control; Triglyceride,"In individuals with diabetes, up to 80% of deaths are attributed to heart disease resulting from elevated cholesterol and triglyceride (TG) in the blood. Apolipoprotein B (apoB) is a protein that is made in the liver and released into the blood bound to cholesterol and TG. High level of apoB, which are directly related to high level of cholesterol, is an early indicator of heart disease. ApoB expression and secretion is believed to be controlled by multiple factors including insulin, but we still know very little about the precise regulatory mechanisms. Our laboratory has recently discovered a previously unknown protein called p110 that interacts with the 5' untranslational region of the apoB mRNA and is regulated by insulin. 

The overall objective of this project is to clarify how abnormal plasma and hepatic levels of apoB-associated cholesterol and TG are able to reduce the responsiveness of hepatocytes to insulin.  Cellular factors/proteins that are associated with apoB expression will also be examined.  The efficiency of apoB production is closely linked to the folding and maturation of nascent apoB peptide in the endoplasmic reticulum (ER). We hypothesize that apoB overproduced and largely incorrectly folded may induce accumulation of apoB in hepatocytes ER. This accumulation induces hepatic insulin resistance by causing ER stress. We will further identify the intracellular location where the interactions between apoB and other cellular proteins/factors such as p110 occur. It is possible that mis- localization of these interactions could cause hepatocytes no longer respond to insulin, resulting in a disease state.  

The studies outlined in this application will enhance our understanding of the mechanisms controlling the lipid-associated apoB protein. Knowledge derived from these studies may also allow us to better tailor our therapeutic approaches to combat diabetes and cardiovascular disease.",2 yrs 11 mths,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=173614&lang=en
173616,The influence of age-related changes in cortical function on balance control in older adults,Mochizuki  George,"Mochizuki, George",Toronto Rehabilitation Institute-UHN,Ontario,Canada,200810,71250.0,CIHR Fellowship,Fellowship Programs,Biomedical,Aging,Aging; Balance; Central Nervous System; Falls; Human,"In Canada, falls among older adults pose a serious health risk.  The injuries that result from falls severely challenge the ability to perform every day activities and interfere with mobility. The risk factors that contribute to falls in seniors have been well-documented, but the underlying biological processes that are at the root of falls in older adults remain unknown.  One of these factors may be related to the age-related changes in brain function which influence one's ability to engage the appropriate strategies that are required to prevent a fall from happening.
Success in fall prevention is dependent on the ability to both prepare for and respond to events which may evoke a fall.  These strategies rely on appropriate levels of brain function and activation of muscles involved in the recovery of balance.  The objective of this work is to explore the relationship between brain function and postural control strategies in older adults.  This objective will be met by: 1) assessing the activity of the brain during the execution of postural control strategies and 2) transiently stimulating the brain to enhance the execution of postural control responses.  This project will further the understanding of the biological processes contributing to falls in healthy older adults and may contribute to the development of strategies aimed at improving postural control and reducing the risk of falls.",1 yr 7 mths,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=173616&lang=en
173634,Changes in motor system connectivity after stroke.,Boudrias  Marie-H&eacute;l&egrave;ne,"Boudrias, Marie-Hélène",University College London (UK),,United Kingdom,200810,180000.0,CIHR Fellowship,Fellowship Programs,Clinical,"Neurosciences, Mental Health and Addiction",Dti; Fmri; Functional Connectivity; Motor Areas; Motor System; Plasticity; Rehabilitation; Stroke; Tms,"Whenever we make a movement, our limbs are responding to a precise command sent by neurons located in the motor areas of our brain. After a stroke, the pathways that normally communicate these motor commands can be damaged, resulting in movement difficulties. The goal of this proposal is to study how the brain reorganizes itself to compensate for such damage and how to enhance recovery. We hope that the information gained by this research will help us to develop effective neurorehabilitation strategies. 

Ongoing advances in our understanding of recovery-related brain changes raise the prospect of directly influencing brain activity to promote desired patterns of brain reorganization. This proposal aims to develop such therapies by targeting the human motor areas, regions shown to be critically involved in recovery of movement after stroke. Using a range of brain imaging and stimulation techniques, we propose to study the anatomy, physiology and functional connectivity of motor circuits in the healthy brain, to test for changes in these circuits in patients suffering from a stroke, and to assess the long-term effects of modulating the spared motor areas. Our hypothesis is that modulating activity in the motor areas based on the residual functional motor network of patients that suffered from a stoke, particularly the secondary motor areas, will increase the beneficial effects of rehabilitation in patients. 

In conclusion, a better understanding of how brain reorganization influences recovery will help us to develop novel therapies for patients suffering from stroke.",3 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=173634&lang=en
173652,The influence of individual and area level socioeconomic status on the relationship between the built environment and neighbourhood-specific physical activity: A Canadian perspective,McCormack  Gavin R,"McCormack, Gavin R",University of Calgary,Alberta,Canada,200810,90000.0,CIHR Fellowship,Fellowship Programs,Social / Cultural / Environmental / Population Health,Population and Public Health,Neighbourhoods; Objectively Measured Built Environment; Physical Activity; Population-Based Survey; Seasonality; Self-Reported Built Environment; Socioeconomic Status; Urban Design; Walkability; Walkability Index,"Participation in physical activity can provide potential health enhancing benefits however only 49% of Canadians achieve the recommended level of physical activity required to benefit their health. Moreover, physical activity levels are often lower among those socioeconomically disadvantaged. There has been recent focus on the built environments role in supporting health, including physical activity participation. Studies have shown associations between built environmental features (i.e. access to sidewalks and public open space, and land use mix) and physical activity however, examination of these relationships with regard to socioeconomic status (SES) is limited. 

This project forms part of a current study (Economic Evaluation of Using Urban Form to Increase Activity-EcoEUFORIA) involving telephone interviews and postal surveys to collect data from a random sample of Calgarian adults (n = 4400). Interviews capture physical activity, reasons for residing in respondents' current neighbourhood, SES (i.e., education and home ownership) and demographic information. Postal surveys capture perceptions of neighbourhood walkability and SES (i.e., income). Objective measures of neighbourhood walkability will be derived using spatial data from the City of Calgary. Area level SES will be derived from the 2006 Canadian Census and linked to interview and survey data using postal code. The walkability of neighbourhoods will be compared for high and low SES areas and the moderating affect of individual and area level SES on associations between perceived and objectively measured walkability and physical activity examined.

By examining the above relationships this research will provide unique information about 1) the associations between environmental determinants of physical activity in the context of individual and area level SES and 2) the distribution of specific environmental facilitators or barriers to physical activity across differing SES Calgary neighbourhoods.",2 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=173652&lang=en
173653,Study of the mechanism of miRNA-mediated control of gene expression,Sundermeier  Thomas,"Sundermeier, Thomas",McGill University,Qu&eacute;bec,Canada,200810,135000.0,CIHR Fellowship,Fellowship Programs,Biomedical,Cancer Research,Cancer; Eukaryotic Translation Initiation; Mirna; Mrna Deadenylation And Decay; Translational Control Of Gene Expression,"The discovery of micro-RNA (miRNA)-mediated gene silencing has added a new level of complexity to our understanding of the control of gene expression in biological systems.  miRNAs bind specifically to certain mRNAs, regulating the synthesis of cellular proteins. They have been implicated in the control of numerous biological processes including development and immune system function. Furthermore, control of gene expression through miRNA activity has been shown to play a crucial role in a myriad of human pathologies, most notably cancer.  Considering the ubiquity of miRNA-mediated repression throughout basic cell biological processes, the understanding of its mechanism of action is paramount to obtaining a clear picture of the regulation of gene expression in biological systems. However, a clear picture of the mechanism of miRNA action remains elusive. Manipulation of miRNA pathways for treatment of a broad range of human disease will require a detailed understanding of their mechanism of action. The experiments proposed here promise to provide significant insight into this mechanism.",3 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=173653&lang=en
173655,The role of Apical Junction Complexes in airway epithelial repair and differentiation in asthma,Hackett  Tillie-Louise,"Hackett, Tillie-Louise",University of British Columbia,British Columbia,Canada,200810,22500.0,Fellowship - PA: Respiratory Health - CIHR/CLA/GSK,Fellowship Programs,Biomedical,Circulatory and Respiratory Health,Adherens Junctions; Airway Epithelium; Airway Remodeling; Asthma; Epithelial Differentiation; Epithelial Wound Repair; Pediatric; Tight Junctions,"Asthma is a serious world-wide public health problem with the Global Initiative for Asthma (GINA) reporting that as many as 300 million people world wide have the disease. Although much is known about the allergic inflammatory events that occur during an asthma attack little is known about the structural changes termed airway remodeling which also occur and contribute toward the clinical symptoms of the disease. Airway remodeling can be defined as changes in the composition, content and organization of cellular and molecular constituents of the airway wall. These structural changes include epithelium detachment and expression of markers associated with tissue injury, sub epithelial fibrosis, increased smooth muscle mass, mucus gland hyperplasia and airway edema. The epithelium is a tissue composed of cells that lines the surfaces of the body including the lungs. As the epithelium within the airways is the first point of contact with the external environment and inhaled aeroallergens it is a logical target to determine the mechanisms of airway remodeling in allergic asthma. The apical junction complex (AJC) forms the structural cell-cell adhesion junctions which regulate permeability across the epithelium and acts as a rate limiting barrier to penetration of inhaled environmental stimuli. However, recent studies have now demonstrated that AJCs are important for the regulation of cell proliferation and differentiation which are both important for normal epithelial repair following injury. We will determine if AJCs play an important role in epithelial repair and if these mechanisms are altered in asthma. This application is important as airway remodeling in established asthma is poorly responsive to current therapies such as inhaled corticosteroids and reliever medications. Characterization of the role AJC proteins in epithelial wound repair could lead to new therapeutic strategies for treatment of airway remodeling in asthma.",2 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=173655&lang=en
173660,pH-dependent Protein Activation by Growth Factors and Oncogenes,Webb  Bradley A,"Webb, Bradley A",Undetermined,Unknown,Unknown,200810,129167.0,CIHR Fellowship,Fellowship Programs,Biomedical,Cancer Research,Cancer; Cellular Motility; Cellular Signaling; Intracellular Ph; Sirna Screen,"The pH inside normal cells is tightly controlled to be kept neutral at ~7.1. However, one of the hallmarks of cancer cells is the absence of a controlled intracellular pH (pHi), which increases to an alkaline value of ~7.5, although the signals causing this alkalinization of the cell are largely unknown. We predict that specific signaling enzymes in the cell are responsible for inducing the increase in pHi observed in cancer cell. The first aim of my research is to identify signaling molecules that induce the increased pHi and examine their role in the induction and progression of cancer. Additionally, an increase in pHi of ~0.4 promotes cancer cell progression and the spread of cancer cells in metastasis. However, how an alkaline pHi generates a ""go"" signal for cancer progression is unknown. A second prediction is that specific proteins in cells that promote cancer are turned on at alkaline pH but not the neutral pH of normal cells. If we can discover which proteins are ""pH sensors"" and are activated at higher pH we can develop therapeutics that block their pH-dependent function as an approach to halt the progression and spread of cancer. The second aim of my research is to identify proteins that are activated by increased pHi and to test their function in promoting cancer. To achieve this we developed cell models we can use to experimentally change pHi and strategies to purify and identify proteins that are turned on at the alkaline pHi of cancer cells but not at the neutral pHi of normal cells. The importance of this work is the promise to identify markers for cancer progression and potential targets for therapies to halt the spread of cancer cells.",2 yrs 7 mths,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=173660&lang=en
173672,Synaptic loss in neurodegenerative diseases: Identification of structural and molecular events leading to the collapse of the synapse,Hazrati  Lili-Naz,"Hazrati, Lili-Naz","Centre for Research in Neurodegenerative Disease (Toronto, Ontario)",Ontario,Canada,200809,172500.0,CIHR Clinician Scientist - Phase 1,Fellowship Programs,Biomedical,"Neurosciences, Mental Health and Addiction",Dendritic Spine; In Vivo Imaging; Neurodegeneration; Synapse,"Loss of communication between neurons (synaptic contacts) characterizes most neurodegenerative diseases and it is this loss that correlates the best with the cognitive decline and functional regression, both of which are the most significant ravaging aspects of these ailments. Indeed, the loss of synaptic structures is the most fundamental change in neurodegenerative diseases, as it encompasses the basis of the collapse of brain function and is the only strong correlate of cognitive decline. Although synaptic loss has been repeatedly reported in different disease entities including Alzheimer's disease (AD), the mechanism underlying their disappearance is not well understood. Synaptic loss is often viewed as a change secondary to the toxic effects of the abnormal proteins such as beta-amyloid, or as a consequence of overall neuronal death.  However, the load and location of abnormal proteins do not correlate very well with the clinical severity of the dementia and recent data clearly indicates that clearing of the toxic amyloid does not lead to cognitive improvement but rather no change in the course of the disease.
In this study, we aim at combining emerging technologies from imaging, molecular and proteomics to study the underlying mechanisms leading to the loss of synapses in an animal model of AD.  Better insight into these processes is essential for the design of effective treatment and preventive strategies to eradicate some of these devastating diseases that are costly at both human and economical levels.",3 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=173672&lang=en
173682,Improving the Risk-Stratification and Prevention of Cardiac Complications after Major Non-Cardiac Surgery,Wijeysundera  Duminda N,"Wijeysundera, Duminda N",University of Toronto,Ontario,Canada,200809,172500.0,CIHR Clinician Scientist - Phase 1,Fellowship Programs,Clinical,Circulatory and Respiratory Health,Administrative Data; Anesthesia; Clonidine; Echocardiography; Non-Invasive Cardiac Stress Test; Perioperative Cardiac Complications; Population-Based Cohort Study; Propensity Score; Randomized Controlled Trial; Surgery,"Every year, 3 million people worldwide suffer a heart attack or major heart problem after surgery. These problems are important, since they increase patients' risk of dying, or staying in hospital for a long time. My proposal consists of 2 studies that will examine how to prevent heart attacks after surgery. In Study 1, I will evaluate a drug, clonidine, which protects the heart from the stress of surgery, and therefore may prevent heart attacks. To be very sure that clonidine prevents heart attacks, you need to study about 6500 patients at many different hospitals. To plan such a big project, you first need to know how many people at each hospital would take part in such a study. In Study 1, I will measure how long it takes 3 different Canadian hospitals to find 165 people take part in a study of clonidine after surgery. This first will also help decide if clonidine is safe to use during surgery. I will use the results of Study 1 to then design a large future study that will definitely decide whether clonidine can help prevent heart attacks after surgery. This future study is very important. At present, doctors have few choices of drugs to prevent heart attacks after surgery. Thus, if clonidine turns out to be helpful, millions of people will benefit. Study 1 is thus the first step in this important larger project. In Study 2, I will study whether 2 heart tests, stress tests and echocardiograms, can help prevent deaths after surgery. These tests provide information that may improve the care of patients who are having surgery. I will determine whether people who had these tests before surgery had a lower risk of dying. Study 2 will also have an important impact on the healthcare system. If I find that patients who had these tests had a lower chance of dying, I can recommend that more patients undergo these tests. If patients who had these tests do not have better results, Study 2 can provide important information to improve the future use of these tests.",3 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=173682&lang=en
173683,"Analytic Network To Improve Surveillance, Evaluation, Prevention and Science of Infections after Surgery (ANTI-SEPSIS)",Daneman  Nick,"Daneman, Nick",Institute for Clinical Evaluative Sciences-Toronto,Ontario,Canada,200809,172500.0,CIHR Clinician Scientist - Phase 1,Fellowship Programs,Health systems / services,Health Services and Policy Research,Administrative Data; Epidemiology; Health Services Research; Nosocomial Infections; Patient Safety; Prevention; Quality Improvement; Risk Factors; Surgical Site Infections; Surveillance,"Hospital associated infections are a common and preventable cause of death in Canada.  In particular, surgical site infections lead to longer hospital stays, more patient suffering, increased mortality, and greater economic costs for hospitals and health care systems.  These adverse events arise from a complex interaction of pathogen, patient and procedural factors.  Strategies to prevent surgical site infections, therefore, must be broad based targeting preoperative, intraoperative and postoperative risk factors.
     Effective surgical site infection surveillance systems are vital to detect these novel risk factors for infection, provide benchmark infection rates, and identify substandard processes.  The gold standard has been clinical surveillance networks, but the intensive labour and financial costs of these systems limit the extent of participating hospitals, the capacity for outpatient follow up, and the ability to account for different levels of risk.  Datasets extracted from administrative logs offer another potential source of surveillance, with advantages of population-based data, cost-efficiency, outpatient follow-up, and robust risk adjustment.
     This research program will aim to harness administrative and clinical datasets for the surveillance, evaluation, prevention and science of infections after surgery.  The goal will be the identification of modifiable patient, surgeon and hospital risk factors for surgical site infection, as well as the establishment of an ongoing network to improve the care of Canadian surgical patients.",3 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=173683&lang=en
173684,Identification and Characterization of Human Liver Cancer Stem Cells,Ghanekar  Anand,"Ghanekar, Anand",University of Toronto,Ontario,Canada,200809,172500.0,CIHR Clinician Scientist - Phase 1,Fellowship Programs,Biomedical,Cancer Research,Cancer; Differentiation; Flow Cytometry; Hepatocellular Carcinoma; Human; Immunosuppression; Liver; Stem Cell; Transplantation; Xenograft,"Liver cancer is the fifth most common cancer worldwide, and the third most common cause of death from cancer.
Some patients with early stage liver cancer can be effectively treated with surgical removal of the tumor or a liver
transplant. Most patients have a very poor prognosis because they do not qualify for surgery and  other 
treatments are ineffective. In order to design new treatments to help people with liver cancer, a better
understanding is needed of how liver cancer develops. Recent studies suggest that only a few of the cells in a
tumor, called ""cancer stem cells,"" are responsible for starting and renewing the tumor as well as determining how 
it grows, spreads, and responds to therapy.  The role of cancer stem cells in liver cancer is not well understood. 
The first aim of this study is to identify cancer stem cells in human liver cancer. To do this, tumor cells from 
patients having surgery for liver cancer will be used to grow human liver tumors in mice. Tumor cells with 
different protein signatures will be tested for their abilities to self-renew as well as generate complete human 
liver cancers in the mice, which are the hallmarks of cancer stem cells. Once the cancer stem cells can be 
identified, they will be analyzed for features that are responsible for distinct patterns of tumor growth that are 
seen in different patients. In addition, the liver cancer stem cells will be compared with mature cells and stem 
cells from normal liver to better understand how the cancer stem cells develop and function. Finally, the ability to
grow human liver tumors in mice will be used to study the effects of different drugs on the ability of liver cancer
stem cells to cause disease. This research will provide important new information about the way in which human
liver cancer develops, and may lead to new methods to effectively diagnose and treat the many patients with this
deadly disease.",3 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=173684&lang=en
173692,Development of Enzyme Replacement Therapy for Urea Cycle Defects,Campeau  Philippe M,"Campeau, Philippe M",McGill University,Texas,United States of America,200809,187500.0,CIHR Clinician Scientist - Phase 1,Fellowship Programs,Biomedical,Genetics,Enzyme Replacement Therapy; Genetic Disorders; Inborn Errors Of Metabolism; Protein Transduction; Urea Cycle Defects,"Urea cycle defects (UCDs) are frequent genetic disorders, affecting up to 1/8200 children, and are notably difficult to treat, causing severe neurologic disease and early death. Novel therapies are urgently needed. Gene therapy is promising, but issues limiting its use include the difficulty in obtaining a sustained correction, and the immune reactions limiting re-administration of the vectors. An interesting therapeutic avenue is enzyme replacement therapy (ERT), which has permitted great advances in the treatment of lysosomal storage diseases (other genetic diseases). To apply such a therapy to UCDs, the intravenously injected enzyme should reach the interior of liver cells. This can be done by modifying the enzyme (adding a portion called a protein transduction domain, which will permit efficient cell entry) and injecting this enzyme intravenously. We hypothesize that protein transduction domains can be fused to urea cycle enzymes to develop enzyme replacement therapy for common urea cycle defects. The proof of principle will be done in mouse models. To develop ERT, we will first modify genes to encode the missing enzymes fused to the protein transduction domains. The fusion proteins will be produced in bacteria. We will verify the ability of the fusion proteins to reach the cytoplasm or mitochondria in vitro and in vivo in mice. We will assess correction of the disease by analysis of amino acids and other metabolites in the plasma and urine. We will also use a stable nitrogen isotope to study metabolic flux through the urea cycle in the mice. If we attain our goal in mice (i.e. correction of the disease), this will open the door to safe and effective therapies for UCDs in humans.",3 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=173692&lang=en
173709,Crosstalk between Kupffer cells and stellate cells and fibrogenic response,Kalantari  Fariba,"Kalantari, Fariba",Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai (New York),New York,United States of America,200810,50000.0,Fellowship - Priority Announcement: Hepatology,Fellowship Programs,Biomedical,"Nutrition, Metabolism and Diabetes",Collagen; Kupffer Cells; Liver Calcification; Liver Fibrosis; Oxidative Stress; Stellate Cells,"Activation of stellate cells, a key issue in the pathogenesis of hepatic fibrosis, is mediated by factors released from damaged hepatocytes and activated Kupffer cells. Understanding the mechanisms whereby Kupffer cells modulate the formation and secretion of the components of the scar tissue is of great relevance for potential therapeutic intervention. We hypothesize that Kupffer cell-derived factors/reactive species play a critical role in the stellate cell fibrogenic response. We propose to: 1) explore the impact of Kupffer cells on stellate cell collagen I production using an in vitro co-culture model of primary rat Kupffer cells and primary stellate cells; 2) determine if Kupffer cell-derived reactive species are the mediators for collagen I up-regulation in stellate cells measuring the concentration of oxidative and nitrosative species and incubating the co-cultures with antioxidants and inhibitors. Studies to identify the source of reactive species in the co-culture (e.g. NADPH oxidase, xanthine oxidase, mitochondria, cytochrome P450 2E1, and inducible nitric oxide synthase) will involve addition of inhibitors or chemical inducers. The use of conditioned medium from Kupffer cells added to stellate cells, and transfection with siRNA to selectively silence the sources of reactive species in one cell type or the other will help to disect the contribution of each cell type to the effects observed in the co-culture; 3) characterize the contribution of arachidonic acid, as a representative polyunsaturated fatty acid, on collagen I expression in the co-cultures and to compare it to that of other fatty acids; and 4) assess the contribution of chronic ethanol feeding to collagen I expression by stellate cells in co-culture with Kupffer cells and to determine whether increased liver calcification ocurs and this event leads to the fibrogenic response.",2 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=173709&lang=en
173713,Role of disrupted-in-schizophrenia 1 (DISC1) gene in nicotine dependence: an integrated approach,Yan  Yijin,"Yan, Yijin",Centre for Addiction and Mental Health (Toronto),Ontario,Canada,200810,135000.0,CIHR Fellowship,Fellowship Programs,Biomedical,"Neurosciences, Mental Health and Addiction",Addiction And Relapse; Cell Signaling; Comorbidity Between Addiction And Mental Disorders; Depression; Genetic Polymorphism; Genetically Disc1 Mutant Mice; Genotyping; Intravenous Drug Self-Administration; Schizophrenia; Tobacco Smoking Dependence,"Tobacco addiction through cigarette smoking is the leading preventable cause of death in the world. It has become clear that tobacco addiction is the deadliest and kills nearly 4 million people annually. The smoking addiction is particularly frequent in patients suffering from mental health disorders. However, the neurobiological mechanisms that could explain this frequent co-morbidity remain unclear. (DISC1) Disrupted-in-schizophrenia 1 (DISC1) has been identifies as a strong candidate susceptibility gene for major mental illness, including schizophrenia, bipolar disorder, and major depression. We hypothesize that the DISC1 gene is also a risk genetic factor for explaining the co-morbidity between mental health disorders and smoking addiction although its role in tobacco dependence has not been explored so far. Nicotine has been identified as a major psychoactive component of tobacco. Here, we are planning to use intravenous nicotine self-administration (the 'Gold Standard' in the field) in genetically mutant mice as a model to explore the involvement of DISC1 gene in behavioural and brain mechanisms that lead to tobacco dependence and relapse disorders. In collaboration with distinguished scientists in the field, we will perform genetic analysis using clinical blood samples to validate our preclinical findings. By identifying DISC1 as a potential risk gene involved in tobacco addiction, these studies may allow explain the frequent co-morbidity that exists between tobacco dependence and mental health disorders, and develop new therapies against tobacco addiction.",3 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=173713&lang=en
173715,Role of chromatin modifications in meiotic double strand break (DSB) formation and repair,Sapountzi  Vasileia,"Sapountzi, Vasileia",Universit&eacute; Laval,Qu&eacute;bec,Canada,200810,97500.0,CIHR Fellowship,Fellowship Programs,Biomedical,Cancer Research,Ageing; Chromatin; Chromatin Immunoprecipitation; Dna Damage; Histone Acetylation; Meiosis; Protein Complex Purification/Analysis,"DNA is a biomolecule that carries the hereditary information which is needed for the construction and maintenance of the living organism. Cells have elaborate ways of packaging DNA, for reasons of compaction and organisation. DNA is tightly bound to a scaffold comprising molecules called histones; this forms a structure called 'chromatin'.
Apart from its compaction role, chromatin also protects DNA from breaking: various agents, originating from inside the cell (such as toxic by-products of metabolism) or the cell's environment (such as carcinogenic pollutants and radiation) can generate breaks along the DNA molecule.
The majority of these breaks are extremely dangerous, as they result in loss of genetic information and/or genetic mistakes. Cells with untreated DNA breaks cannot function properly and this is often the underlying reason of diseases such as cancer.
However, not all breaks are lethal; pre-programmed DNA breaks occur naturally during meiosis, the biological process important for reproduction. The DNA breaks in meiosis are actually very important for the inheritance of genetic information to future generations.
Whether accidental or pre-programmed, DNA breaks need to be treated promptly in order to ensure that the cell survives the damage and continues to function properly. The way that the cells detect and repair DNA breaks is not yet clear, but is the topic of an expanding field of molecular biology. Recent evidence suggests that chromatin plays an active role in this process.
In this project, we are planning to study in more detail how chromatin affects the formation and repair of DNA breaks during meiosis. If one understands how pre-programmed DNA breaks are generated and repaired, one will be able to understand how carcinogen-generated DNA breaks occur and can be prevented. One will also be able to utilise this information in order to design therapies of
diseases resulting from these agents, such as cancer.",2 yrs 2 mths,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=173715&lang=en
173718,The non-apoptotic tumor suppressor mechanisms of p53 in metabolism and senescence,Cheung  Chi-Ching E,"Cheung, Chi-Ching E",Beatson Institute for Cancer Research (UK),,United Kingdom,200810,150000.0,CIHR Fellowship,Fellowship Programs,Biomedical,Cancer Research,Aging; Cancer; Cancer Metabolism; Glycolysis; Mitochondria; Molecular Biology; Mouse Models Of Cancer; P53; Senescence; Tumor Suppressor,"Cancer is a leading cause of premature death in Canada, with an estimated 159900 new cases of cancer and 72700 deaths in 2007. It is therefore imperative to discover and develop novel drug targets to treat cancer. The p53 protein plays a key role in suppressing cancer, since p53 is mutated in almost all cancers and it can inhibit tumor proliferation and eliminate cancer cells. The major goals of my work are to understand how p53 functions to prevent cancer progression, and how the protective role of p53 is lost to allow tumor to grow. Previous studies have shown that p53 is able to promote cell death to inhibit cancer, however, recently a new target of p53, named TIGAR, was identified that regulates metabolism. The p53 gene has also been indicated to promote cellular aging (senescence) to prevent cancer progression, however, the exact mechanism remains elusive. In this study we will investigate how this new non-cell death activity of p53 contribute to cancer suppression, specifically, how p53 regulates cellular aging through the control of energy metabolism by TIGAR. We will use specific gene targeting techniques in cells and in mouse models of cancer to investigate this novel role of p53. With this information, we may be able to design novel cancer therapeutic strategies based on reinstating p53 functions in tumor cells.",3 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=173718&lang=en
173774,A probabilistic network of yeast gene regulation,Weirauch  Matthew T,"Weirauch, Matthew T",University of Toronto,Ontario,Canada,200810,135000.0,CIHR Fellowship,Fellowship Programs,Biomedical,Genetics,Bioinformatics; Data Integration; Disease Genes; Functional Genomics; Gene Networks; Gene Regulation; Probabilistic Models,"The cell is a complicated machine which must constantly respond to environmental and internal changes in order to properly control the production of its gene products.  Many diseases result from a disruption in the cell's ability to properly respond to such cues.  In particular, interference with critical regulators which control up to thousands of genes can severely compromise the system, resulting in diseases such as cancer or Alzheimer's.  A better understanding of gene regulation and the ability to predict the effects of perturbations to the system are therefore essential to the treatment of disease.  In this study, I present a model of gene regulatory systems created from diverse sources of information.  I use the budding yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae as a model organism to study gene regulation because its regulatory system is relatively simple compared to humans.  However, I anticipate that the insights gained from the model will shed light on novel aspects of gene regulation, and that the methods I develop will eventually be directly applicable to the study of human disease.",3 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=173774&lang=en
173790,Elucidating the mechanism of action of Clioquinol in Acute Myeloid Leukemia,Sukhai  Mahadeo,"Sukhai, Mahadeo",University Health Network (Toronto),Ontario,Canada,200810,135000.0,CIHR Fellowship,Fellowship Programs,Biomedical,Cancer Research,Acute Myeloid Leukemia; Bortezomib; Cell Death; Cell Viability; Clioquinol; Kinetics Of Clioquinol Action; Non-Competitive Inhibition; Pharmacokinetics; Phase 1 Clinical Trial; Proteasome Inhibition,"The proteasome is an enzymatic complex that degrades excess and misfolded proteins in the cell.  Proteasome inhibitors induce cell death in malignant cells. The proteasome inhibitor, bortezomib, has been approved for the treatment of multiple myeloma and is under evaluation for the treatment of other malignancies. Through high throughput screening, the off-patent antimicrobial, Clioquinol, was identified to inhibit the proteasome and induce cell death in malignant cells through a copper- dependent mechanism.  Here, we will examine the mechanism by which Clioquinol and copper inhibit the proteasome and test the hypothesis that they act through a mechanism distinct from known proteasome inhibitors. We also propose to synthesize and test analogues of Clioquinol to better understand its mechanism of action.  Finally, we propose an early stage clinical trial of oral Clioquinol in patients with refractory leukemia.  In the context of this trial, we will determine whether Clioquinol can inhibit the proteasome and induce cell death in leukemia cells after systemic administration. Thus, we will further our understanding of the proteasome and highlight new strategies for its inhibition. This work is highly translational as we strive to repurpose Clioquinol as an anti-cancer agent and advance a molecule from our laboratory to clinical trial.",3 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=173790&lang=en
173827,Use of ampethamine-type substances and HIV/STI transmission among female sex workers in Cambodia,Couture  Marie-Claude,"Couture, Marie-Claude",University of California (San Francisco),California,United States of America,200810,150000.0,CIHR Fellowship,Fellowship Programs,Social / Cultural / Environmental / Population Health,Population and Public Health,Amphetamine-Type Subtances; Epidemiology; Global Health; Hiv/Aids; Sex Workers; Sexual Behaviors; Sexually Transmitted Disease,"Cambodia is the country in Southeast Asia that is the most affected by the HIV epidemic. Factors contributing to the epidemic include poverty, sexually transmitted infections (STI), trafficking of women, widespread patronage of female sex workers (FSW) and a highly mobile workforce. FSW are a high risk group for HIV/STI and often use amphetamine-type substances (ATS). This is a great public health concern since ATS users are usually are more prone to engage in risky sexual behaviours, and thus have a greater risk of STI/HIV infections. In addition, ATS can produce aggressiveness and make their users more susceptible to experience violence. For its part, violence has also been associated with unprotected sexual intercourses and increased risk of HIV/STI infections. Until now, little is known about ATS use among FSW or its effects on HIV/STI acquisition or transmission. 

This project first aims to describe ATS use among FSW working in brothels and entertainment or drinking establishments in Phnom Penh, Cambodia. Secondly, the ATS use reported by the FSW will be compared to the ATS drug levels detected in their urine in order to examine the concordance and the validity of self-report. Finally, the study will verify the hypothesis that FSW who use ATS are more susceptible to engage is risky sexual behaviours, be infected by HIV/STI, experience diverse forms of violence, and less likely to adhere to an antiretroviral (ART) treatment against HIV and vaccine schedule for HPV (Human papilloma virus). In order to achieve these objectives, a prospective cohort study will be conducted which will follow FSW for one year, with visits every three months. Findings from this study will help better understand the underlying mechanisms involved in the influence of ATS use on HIV transmission. Also, this study will yield important data on the interactions between transactional sex, drugs, violence and HIV risk, which will help improve current prevention interventions.",3 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=173827&lang=en
173835,The functional role of a H2AX promoter polymorphism associated with non-Hodgkin lymphoma,Bretherick  Karla L,"Bretherick, Karla L",University of British Columbia,British Columbia,Canada,200810,135000.0,CIHR Fellowship,Fellowship Programs,Biomedical,Cancer Research,Cancer Genetics; Common Genetic Variant; Disease Susceptibility; Functional Genetics; Histone H2ax; Non-Hodgkin Lymphoma,"Non-Hodgkin lymphoma (NHL) is a specific type of cancer in which an abnormal growth of cells of the immune system produces a tumour. The cells in these tumours often have a type of chromosome damage called a translocation, where two chromosomes are incorrectly joined together. These translocations may occur when genes that are responsible for repairing damaged DNA are not functioning properly. Although most of the DNA sequence is similar between individuals, there are a number of DNA sequence differences, known as genetic variants. Previous studies in my lab looked at genetic variation in six DNA repair genes in patients with NHL and control (unaffected) individuals. They found that a common DNA sequence variant at one of these genes, called H2AX, was much more frequent among the patients than the controls. Individuals who carry this gene variant have twice the risk of NHL as those who do not have it. Since this DNA sequence feature is very common in the population, it is predicted that 23% of NHL could be caused by this gene variant. The goal of this project is to determine why individuals with the H2AX gene variant have increased risk of NHL. The DNA sequence variant is found at the part of the gene that controls how H2AX is regulated and may affect how this gene is turned on and off. Since H2AX is a gene involved in repairing damaged DNA, if it is not regulated correctly, damaged DNA may not be properly repaired, leading to the translocations found in NHL tumours. Using molecular techniques and cell culture assays, I will look at how this DNA sequence variant affects regulation of the gene and influences the ability of the cell to repair and survive DNA damage. Understanding how and why this specific gene variant increases risk for NHL will lead to a better knowledge of how this cancer develops. This information will eventually be useful for identifying new drug targets and therapies for NHL, and may provide insight into the development of other cancers as well.",3 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=173835&lang=en
173885,"Aging, spermatogenesis and fertility",Paul  Catriona L,"Paul, Catriona L",McGill University,Qu&eacute;bec,Canada,200810,90000.0,CIHR Fellowship,Fellowship Programs,Biomedical,Aging,Aging; Animal Work; Cell Culture; Gene Expression; Male Infertility; Spermatogensis; Spermatogonial Stem Cells,"The Canadian population is aging though many of the biological mechanisms that underlie this process remain poorly understood. However, there is increasing evidence that the male reproductive system declines with age and that fathers over the age of 50 have increasing problems with spermatogenesis. Spermatogenesis is a multistep process whereby mature motile sperm develop via a number of cell divisions from spermatogonial stem cells (SSCs). It is therefore important to keep the population of these stem cells healthy and in good supply. It is now well documented that the age of the male partner is strongly correlated with a decrease in sperm motility and normal morphology as well as with decreased pregnancy rates and increased time to pregnancy. There is also a possibility that increasing paternal age is linked to chromosome damage and to genetic problems in children from these older fathers. The aim of this project is to further understand how age affects the function of SSCs and the cells that support them both for survival and development: the Sertoli cell. It is intended that this study will determine whether the problems seen in spermatogenesis in older men are a result of an impaired SSC population or a defect in their supporting cells (Sertoli cells) or indeed both. This will be achieved by undertaking a comparison between the function of aged SSCs and young SSCs and assessing the ability of the two groups to produce fully functional sperm. In addition Sertoli cells from the two age groups will be assessed for differences in gene and protein expression. This study will provide insight and practical knowledge regarding the impact of paternal age on sperm quality and fertility.",2 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=173885&lang=en
173908,Chemical-genetic control of protein folding to study subcellular unfolded protein response,Rakhit  Rishi,"Rakhit, Rishi",Stanford University (California),California,United States of America,200810,150000.0,CIHR Fellowship,Fellowship Programs,Biomedical,Aging,Chemical Biology; Dna Microarray; Endosome; Ligand-Protein Interactions; Organelle; Peroxisome; Unfolded Protein Response; Yeast Functional Genomics,"Eukaryotic cells have numerous self-contained structures that have specialized functions. Proteins have varying lifetimes in these compartments, ranging from a few minutes to the lifetime of the organism. Failure of mechanisms that degrade unfolded proteins results in a build-up of cellular garbage. This occurs under conditions of cellular stress, where the quality control mechanisms responsible for maintaining proteins fail, or, as we age, our cell's ability to degrade proteins naturally decreases. One response is by the 'unfolded protein response', or UPR. In the UPR, specific helper proteins are engaged to increase the protein quality control and degredation mechanisms; however, these are largely limited to the endoplasmic reticulum. Recently, it was discovered that mitochondria also have a system to help combat stress to it. There is no knowledge of any response from any of the myriad other cellular structures. This study will allow comprehensive examination of stress responses in each of the characterized cellular compartments using a drug-dependent model that has been newly developed.
Discovering new genes involved in the UPR and potentially in other structures will increase our basic understanding of how cells deal with debris. This is of utmost importance to the aging process, where our ability to deal with this stress becomes compromised over time. In addition, there are numerous diseases, especially neurodegenerative diseases like ALS and Alzheimer's disease, which are characterized by toxicity of this cellular waste to the mitochondria, ER and other organelles. Knowledge of possible responses could help us engineer ways of helping our cells deal with this stress.",3 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=173908&lang=en
173918,The role of electrical coupling of Hb9 interneurons in generating the rhythms of locomotion.,Bui  Tuan V,"Bui, Tuan V",Dalhousie University (Nova Scotia),Nova Scotia,Canada,200810,90000.0,CIHR Fellowship,Fellowship Programs,Biomedical,"Neurosciences, Mental Health and Addiction",Central Pattern Generator; Electrical Coupling; Gap Junction; Hb9 Interneurons; Locomotion; Mathematical Modeling; Pacemaker; Patch-Clamp Electrophysiology; Rhythmic Oscillation; Spinal Cord,"Whether taking a stroll in a park or sprinting at full speed on a field, there are nerve cells in the spinal cord that are responsible for setting the different paces at which we move. The cells that act as pacemakers for the spinal cord have not been identified yet. A class of cells named Hb9 interneurons have been identified as candidates to play this role. They exhibit several features that predispose them to behave as a biological metronome, continually setting a beat for the spinal cord to follow.  

One feature of Hb9 interneurons is that they not only communicate with other neurons using chemicals known as neurotransmitters, but also by sharing electrical connections with their neighbours. This form of communication is more rapid than using neurotransmitters. It is believed that electrical communication between neurons enable them to fire together at frequencies unattainable if these neurons communicated only by using neurotransmitters. We propose to study whether these electrical communications between Hb9 interneurons and their neighbouring neurons allow them to greatly expand their ability to set paces that vary between crawling and sprinting at full speed. We will use mathematical models of these cells to demonstrate the benefits of the electrical communications that Hb9 interneurons share with others. Then we will record the activity of these cells in a live mouse spinal cord and disrupt their electrical communication to see if this hampers their ability to set different paces.

The challenges faced in alleviating the suffering from movement disorders are two-fold: First, the ability to move the necessary muscles must be restored. Second, the ability to move these muscles at an appropriate rhythm has to be developed. By understanding how the spinal cord sets the pace of our movements, we will be in a better position to identify strategies that will enable the restoration of a full range of movement speeds to those suffering from movement disorders.",2 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=173918&lang=en
173923,Health Impacts of Highly Skilled Participation: Development and Application of a Sensorimotor Test Battery,Guptill  Christine A,"Guptill, Christine A",McMaster University,Ontario,Canada,200810,135000.0,CIHR Fellowship,Fellowship Programs,Clinical,Musculoskeletal Health and Arthritis,Athletes; Musicians; Pain; Prevalence; Proprioception; Risk; Sensory Discrimination; Skilled Participation; Survey; Temperature Sensation,"The experience of illness is individual, and depends in part on contextual factors such as financial circumstances and a supportive work environment. Researchers do not yet fully understand how these factors influence health. The differences between groups of people whose occupations require highly skilled participation, including musicians and athletes, can help us understand how contextual factors affect the health of all people.
At any time, about 40% of professional musicians have injuries related to playing an instrument, mostly affecting arms and backs. These injuries are poorly defined in research and large-scale data has not been collected in North America since 1986. For comparison, tennis players have about the same number of injuries but they experience different contexts. Professional athletes tend to have high salaries; most professional orchestra members make between $20,000 and $30,000/year. Athletes have access to sports injuries clinics and team doctors, while many professional musicians don't even have extended health insurance. An injury might mean a musician can't work, and the resulting personal financial hardship can translate to an additional tax burden for Canadians. There are over 47,000 professional union musicians in Canada, and many more non-union or amateur musicians who might be affected by these injuries. The cost to taxpayers for our public healthcare system to treat these injuries is substantial. 
The aim of this study is to determine how healthy professional musicians and athletes differ from each other and from other people in terms of their performance on tests of movement and sensation. These results will be used to design a survey to be administered to a large group of professional musicians in Canada and the US to update and improve our understanding of what health problems musicians experience, and how many are affected. This will help in developing better services that recognize the individual nature of health and illness.",3 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=173923&lang=en
173976,EJLB-CIHR Michael Smith Chair in Neurosciences and Mental Health,Northoff  Georg F,"Northoff, Georg F; Nemer, Mona",University of Ottawa,Ontario,Canada,200809,550000.0,Neurosciences and Mental Health,Miscellaneous Programs,Not applicable / Specified,"Neurosciences, Mental Health and Addiction",,,5 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=173976&lang=en
173979,Role of Innate Immunity in Stress-Induced Apoptosis and Plaque Progression in Atherosclerosis,Woo  Wai Hong C,"Woo, Wai Hong C",Columbia University (New York),New York,United States of America,200810,120000.0,CIHR Fellowship,Fellowship Programs,Biomedical,Circulatory and Respiratory Health,Apoptosis; Atherosclerosis; Endoplasmic Reticulum; Inflammation; Innate Immunity; Lesion; Macrophage; Plaque Rupture; Stress; Unfolded Protein Response,"Atherosclerosis is a chronic pathophysiological progress, and its thrombotic complication due to lesion rupture is the leading cause of death in Canada and other industrialized countries. The trend is continuing due to the prevalence of obesity and diabetes. Stabilization of plaque to prevent its rupture leading to blockade of arteries is the fundamental target of therapeutic strategy. Inflammation and death of vascular cells (e.g. macrophages and vascular smooth muscle cells) can promote plaque destabilization. Numerous studies have shown the important relationship between innate immune response and atherosclerosis. Thereby, one of the current therapeutic approaches for atherothrombotic vascular diseases is to interfere the inflammatory response in the vasculature. It is well-known that the decreased response to endotoxin challenge after the first encounter can protect us from endotoxin shock by preventing the overwhelming inflammatory response. My previous data thus far showed that pre-exposure to very low amount of bacterial toxin can also prevent the activation of the cell death pathway in macrophages. In the present study, I will investigate the mechanism of how pre-exposure of low amount of endotoxin may initially delay cell death in the setting of atherosclerosis. The investigation will be further extended to use a molecule to mimic the action of endotoxin.  The manipulation of such mechanism may provide the basis for a therapeutic strategy designed to prevent lesion progression or delay plaque rupture. The predicted finding would reveal a fundamentally novel role of innate immune signaling in atherosclerosis.",2 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=173979&lang=en
173995,Improving Measurements of Intracellular Signaling in Leukemia - A Basis for Diagnosis and Treatment,Bendall  Sean C,"Bendall, Sean C",Stanford University (California),California,United States of America,200810,150000.0,CIHR Fellowship,Fellowship Programs,Biomedical,Cancer Research,Bayesian Network; Biomarker; Cancer; Cell Signalling; Chemotherapy; Flow Cytometry; Leukemia; Phosphorylation; Proteomics; Single Cell,"Abnormalities in cell signaling mechanisms (e.g., protein phosphorylation/dephosphorylation) drive tumour expansion and suppress cell death, contributing to tumour survival despite intense therapeutic regimens.  Recent studies by our group, using flow cytometry to monitor these events in leukemia and lymphoma isolates, have been able to correlate phospho-protein status mechanistically with clinical outcome.  However using conventional flow cytometry, measurement of more than 6 parameters simultaneously to obtain this ""biosignature"" for each sample becomes prohibitively challenging.  Therefore this analysis provides a quantitative but limited view of what we know to be the intricacy of complex transformation in heterogeneous cell populations in vivo. Yet, a recent breakthrough in flow cytometry technology has significantly expanded the number of parameters that can be simultaneously measured in a single experiment (theoretically more than 100).  With this, our goal is to apply simple modifications to protocols already established in our lab for quantization of cellular signaling events to significantly improve the phospho-protein biosignature of leukemia and thus its diagnosis and treatment.  Using this, we will test the hypothesis that both tumour heterogeneity and clinical outcomes can be correlated to the level of signaling heterogeneity (on a cell by cell level), and the significance of this correlation can be vastly increased as we profile more deeply those signaling networks that drive tumour growth and development.",3 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=173995&lang=en
174017,An investigation on naturally acquired microchimerism in the human brain and its impact on health and disease,Chan  Foon Nin W,"Chan, Foon Nin W",University of Alberta,Alberta,Canada,200810,150000.0,CIHR Fellowship,Fellowship Programs,Biomedical,Aging,Brain; Fluorescence In Situ Hybridization; Microchimerism; Polymerase Chain Reaction,"Naturally acquired microchimerism refers to the acquisition of a small number of genetically distinct cells or DNA through pregnancy.  During pregnancy, mother and fetus constantly exchange materials (nutrients, gases and waste products) with each other via the placenta.  Recently, exchanges of cells and/or DNA have also been detected.  Surprisingly, many years after their physical union is severed, maternal microchimerism can be found in her adult offspring and fetal microchimerism in the mother.  These recent findings challenge the traditional view of self and point to the potential for both good and bad consequences for human health.  In humans, maternal and fetal microchimerism has been identified in blood, heart, kidney, pancreas and spleen.  No prior study has tested the brain.  That human brain is likely to include microchimerism is supported by recent experimental studies that found fetal and maternal microchimerism in mouse brain.  Therefore, the overall goal of this project is for the first time to identify, quantify and characterize microchimerism in the human brain, particularly fetal microchimerism in women.  Once the prevalence, quantity and phenotype of microchimerism have been established, we may extend our studies to selective brain diseases.  Effects of microchimerism in the brain could either be beneficial (tissue repair, tumor immune surveillance or normal development) or adverse (targets of immune attack, accessory to degenerative changes or neoplasia).  As there is currently no information regarding naturally acquired microchimerism in the human brain, this project will be the first to explore this new frontier and provide a useful basis of knowledge for future studies of normal development of the brain (including aging) and specific brain diseases.",3 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=174017&lang=en
174028,Effect of the PPAR-alpha L62V polymorphism on the metabolic response to n-3 polyunsaturated fatty acid supplementation,Rudkowska  Iwona,"Rudkowska, Iwona",Universit&eacute; Laval,Qu&eacute;bec,Canada,200810,110000.0,CIHR Fellowship,Fellowship Programs,Clinical,"Nutrition, Metabolism and Diabetes",Cardiovascular Disease; Lipids; Nutrigenomics; Omega-3 Fatty Acids; Polymorphisms,"Background: Cardiovascular disease (CVD) risk is the result of complex interactions between genetic and environmental factors. Nutrition is the most important environmental factor interacting with genes to increase or to decrease the likelihood of developing lipid disorders. The effect of dietary changes on lipid levels differs between individuals. Some individuals appear to be unreactive to dietary intervention, whereas others have enhanced response. For that reason, recent research suggests that genetic variations of the gene encoding the peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor alpha (PPAR-alpha) may modulate the CVD risk profile. Omega-3 fatty acids, found mostly in fish oils, link and stimulate PPAR-alpha gene which can then improve the lipids levels. It is not known whether the variation of PPAR-alpha gene could influence the blood lipid response or the expression of genes in the presence of omega-3 fatty acids. 
Objective: To investigate the gene-diet interaction effects between the variation of the PPAR-alpha gene and omega-3 fatty acids on CVD risk factors. The specific objectives of the research are: Aim 1: To examine whether omega-3 fatty acids induced changes in blood lipids are influenced by the PPAR-alpha gene variation. Aim 2: To verify, in a cell model, whether the expression of various genes in the presence of omega-3 fatty acids are influenced by the variation of PPAR-alpha gene. 
Significance:  It is known that individuals will display high variability in the response to different diets; therefore, nutrition therapy would be more helpful if recommendations are based on genetic facts. This research will demonstrate if a gene-diet interaction effect exists between PPAR-alpha gene and omega-3 fatty acids. Therefore, allow us to be able to suggest supplementation with omega-3 fatty acids for the individuals the most at risk for CVD.",2 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=174028&lang=en
174038,Role of connexins and gap junctions in mammary gland development and function: Potential implications in breast cancer,Plante  Isabelle,"Plante, Isabelle",Western University (Ontario),Ontario,Canada,200810,108750.0,CIHR Fellowship,Fellowship Programs,Biomedical,Cancer Research,Breast Cancer; Connexins; Development; Erbb2; Gap Junctionnal Intercellular Communication; Gap Junctions; Mammary Gland; Mouse Model; Oculodentodigital Dyspasia,"In tissues, cells need to communicate in order to grow, respond to stimuli, develop, specialize and function. Direct communication between two cells is done by specialized structures called gap junctions which are themselves made by protein sub-units named connexins. Abnormal function of gap junctions or mutations in connexins has been linked to various human diseases and developmental disorders, such as oculodentodigital dysplasia (ODDD). It also has been shown that connexins are tumors suppressors and thereby possibly play a role in cancer. To date, no study has evaluated whether women suffering from gap junction related diseases are more susceptible to breast cancer onset or whether the disease is more aggressive. Our objective is to understand the role of gap junctions in the normal development and function of the breast, and to determine their role in breast cancer. To do so, we are using a mouse model that harbors a mutation in a breast connexin and mimics ODDD disease. The development of the mammary gland will be evaluate in these mice and compared to control mice with normal gap junction function. We have also created a new mouse model to examine the role of connexins in breast cancer. These mice have high levels of a protein that predisposes them to breast cancer and half of them also have reduced gap junctions function, while the other half have normal gap junction function. By comparing these two groups, we will be able to determine the role of gap junctions in breast cancer onset, progression and metastasis. Together, these data will give us insights into the role of gap junctions in mammary gland development and breast cancer and on the susceptibility of ODDD women to breast cancer. Understanding the mechanisms of how connexins and gap junctions contribute to the normal development of the breast and how their dysfunction relates to breast cancer is important in order to investigate their role as potential targets for therapeutic intervention.",2 yrs 5 mths,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=174038&lang=en
174054,Cholesterol in islet dysfunction and type 2 diabetes,Kruit  Janine K,"Kruit, Janine K",University of British Columbia,British Columbia,Canada,200810,105000.0,CIHR Fellowship,Fellowship Programs,Biomedical,"Nutrition, Metabolism and Diabetes",Abca1; Beta-Cells; Cholesterol Homeostasis; Glucose Homeostasis; Transgenic Mice,"Type 2 diabetes affects more than 2 million Canadians, and is a major risk factor for coronary heart disease, the leading cause of death in Canada. Type 2 diabetes results from a relative insufficiency of specific cells in the pancreas (""beta-cells"") to produce enough insulin to meet the increasing metabolic demands caused by obesity and ageing. Type 2 diabetes often occurs together with elevated levels of LDL (""bad cholesterol"") and low levels of HDL (""good cholesterol""), but the mechanistic connections between cholesterol metabolism and diabetes are poorly understood. We recently discovered that the cholesterol transporter ABCA1, which is crucial for regulating cholesterol levels inside cells, is essential for the normal release of insulin in beta-cells. Mice which lack Abca1 in beta-cells have impaired glucose tolerance due to impaired beta-cell function. The objective of this proposal is to determine the role of ABCA1 in beta-cell function, glucose metabolism and type 2 diabetes. These studies could suggest a novel mechanism for the development of type 2 diabetes and lead to new ways to prevent and treat this disease.",2 yrs 4 mths,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=174054&lang=en
174065,Transcriptional regulation by SMAD3 in T-lymphocytes,Delisle  Jean-S&eacute;bastien,"Delisle, Jean-Sébastien",Universit&eacute; de Montr&eacute;al,Qu&eacute;bec,Canada,200809,172500.0,CIHR Clinician Scientist - Phase 1,Fellowship Programs,Biomedical,Infection and Immunity,Chromatin; Expression Microarray; Functionnal Genomics; Immune Tolerance; Immunoprecipitation; Smad3; T-Lymphocytes; Tgf-Beta,T-lymphocytes are immune cells that are essential to protect us against microbes. The activation of T-lymphocytes in the face of an infection is beneficial but the spontaneous and uncontrolled activation of T-lymphocytes in healthy individuals can lead to serious illnesses. It is known that T-lymphocytes do attack the normal tissues of the body when they are not under the control of a cytokine (hormone of the immune system) called TGF-beta. TGF-beta keeps T-lymphocytes in a resting state called immune tolerance. Our study aims at unveiling how TGF-beta maintains immune tolerance in the T-lymphocytes. We plan to characterize the biological messages TGF-beta conveys to T-lymphocytes in order to prevent their activation. A deeper understanding of immune tolerance will ultimately improve the care of patients suffering from auto-immune diseases and cancer as well as transplantation recipients.,3 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=174065&lang=en
174071,Prairie Region: Community Based Research Facilitator in HIV/AIDS,Pindera  Carla,"Pindera, Carla",Nine Circles Community Health Centre (Manitoba),Manitoba,Canada,200811,159980.0,HIV/AIDS CBR Program - General - CBR Facilitators,Operating Grants,Health systems / services,Infection and Immunity,Community-Based Research; Hiv/Aids; Research Capacity-Building,"This project will support the continuation of the Community-Based Research Facilitator for the Prairie Region HIV/AIDS Community-Based Research Program (Manitoba and Saskatchewan). In the last phase (2007-2009) of the project the Community Based Research Facilitator has followed the directions set by a regional environmental scan on community-based research capacity in HIV/AIDS in Manitoba and Saskatchewan. In keeping with the direction provided by community agencies, the CBR Facilitator has conducted capacity building workshops and created tools and opportunities to build research skills and capacity in the community and supported ongoing partnership development among academic and community researchers. The current proposal aims to support and sustain the emerging interest in HIV/AIDS community-based research in Manitoba and Saskatchewan as well as to continue to strengthen partnerships between community and universities. In this period we will focus on some specific additional activities that were identified during the previous phase. For instance, we will facilitate the communication around issues of interest such as ethical issues in community-based research and access to ethics review by community agencies; and explore the feasibility of engaging students in providing support to community organizations. As a result of this project, it is expected that community members, community organizations, service providers and researchers will have increased their capacity to engage in community-based research and the application of this research towards enhanced HIV/AIDS prevention, care treatment and support services in the region.",2 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=174071&lang=en
174075,Abnormal Brain Development In Premature Newborns: Risk Factors and Neurodevelopmental Outcome.,Miller  Steven P,"Miller, Steven P",University of British Columbia,British Columbia,Canada,200809,180000.0,CIHR Clinician Scientist - Phase 2,Salary Programs,Clinical,"Human Development, Child and Youth Health",Brain Development; Magnetic Resonance Imaging; Magnetic Resonance Spectroscopy; Neurodevelopmental Outcome; Premature Newborn; White Matter Injury,"Neurodevelopmental impairments are common in newborns delivered prior to term age and result in a large burden of long-term disability. White matter injury, abnormal brain development and systemic illness are interrelated abnormalities that commonly follow preterm birth and may lead to adverse neurodevelopment. Focal non-cystic white matter injury is the characteristic pattern of brain injury in premature newborns. Though focal non-cystic white matter injury is associated with diffuse abnormalities of motor and cognitive function, how this happens is unknown. Systemic illness, such as infection, and therapy, such as postnatal corticosteroids, may also be associated with diffuse abnormalities of motor and cognitive function. The mechanisms by which these conditions cause abnormal outcome are largely unknown. Preliminary data suggest that white matter injury and specific systemic conditions, such as infection, diffusely impair brain development. The overall hypothesis of this prospective cohort study is that delayed brain development, due to systemic illness and white matter injury, results in abnormal motor and cognitive outcome. We will quantify brain development and injury in premature newborns using advanced magnetic resonance (MR) techniques shortly after birth and again at term-equivalent age: deformation tensor morphometry for anatomic brain structure, diffusion tensor imaging for brain connectivity and MR spectroscopic imaging for brain metabolism. A better understanding of the clinical factors that impact brain development and white matter injury will allow us to directly improve the neurodevelopmental outcome of premature newborns.",3 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=174075&lang=en
174078,Le projet de Facilitateur de la recherche communautaire de la Coalition des organismes communautaires québécois de lutte contre le sida (COCQ-Sida),Pineault  Lyse,"Pineault, Lyse","COCQ-Sida (Montr&eacute;al, Qu&eacute;bec)",Qu&eacute;bec,Canada,200811,155648.0,HIV/AIDS CBR Program - General - CBR Facilitators,Operating Grants,Social / Cultural / Environmental / Population Health,Infection and Immunity,Développement De Partenariats; Recherche Communautaire; Renforcement Des Capacités; Transfert Des Connaissances; Vih-Sida,"Constituée en mars 1990, la Coalition des Organismes Communautaires Québécois de lutte contre le Sida (COCQ-Sida) est un regroupement provincial de 34 organisations oeuvrant dans la lutte contre le VIH/sida au Québec. La Coalition est un des plus grands regroupements provinciaux VIH au Canada. Elle est représentée dans presque toutes les 17 régions administratives du Québec. Le mandat de la COCQ-Sida est de regrouper les organismes communautaires québécois impliqués dans la lutte contre le sida, afin de favoriser l'émergence et le soutien d'une action concertée  tout en respectant l'autonomie de chacun de ses groupes membres. La recherche communautaire constitue un des outils fondamentaux à travers duquel la COCQ-Sida accomplit son mandat. 

Les principaux objectifs du projet FRC pour la période 2009-2011 sont : augmenter la capacité des organismes membres de la COCQ-Sida à effectuer de la recherche communautaire; favoriser l'association entre chercheurs universitaires et organismes communautaires afin d'inclure des préoccupations communautaires dans la recherche universitaire; ainsi que faciliter l'utilisation rapide des résultats de recherche dans la pratique quotidienne des organismes communautaires. Les activités proposées dans le cadre de ce projet ont été déterminées d'une part par les besoins observés et exprimés par les intervenants au cours des deux dernières années, et d'autre part, par les orientations prises par la direction générale et le Conseil d'administration de la Coalition, lesquelles visent le rayonnement de la recherche communautaire à travers l'établissement des partenariats au niveau provincial, national et international. La Coalition compte également établir un processus d'évaluation axé sur les résultats pour mesurer l'efficacité de tous ses projets, dont le projet FRC.",2 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=174078&lang=en
174079,Promouvoir des environnements favorables pour prévenir l'acquisition/transmission du VIH avec des personnes s'injectant des drogues,C&ocirc;t&eacute;  Fran&ccedil;oise,"Côté, Françoise; Gagnon, Mario; Noel, Lina",Universit&eacute; Laval,Qu&eacute;bec,Canada,200811,17600.0,Catalyst Grant: HIV/AIDS CBR Program - General Stream,Operating Grants,Social / Cultural / Environmental / Population Health,Infection and Immunity,Cartographie Conceptuelle; Croisement Des Savoirs; Environnements; Personnes Udi; Vih; Étude De Faisabilité,"Une perspective historique permet de constater une évolution dans la manière dont différents acteurs sociaux perçoivent aujourd'hui la problématique de la prévention du VIH auprès des personnes qui s'injectent des drogues (UDI). Par exemple à Québec, l'accent sur la diminution des comportements à risque s'est déplacé vers la promotion de comportements sains. Dans cette optique, deux projets basés dans la communauté sont actuellement développés dans un partenariat impliquant des membres de la communauté UDI, Point de Repères et l'Université Laval. Ces actions mettent l'accent sur la mobilisation des personnes UDI et ont l'importante caractéristique de faire émerger un processus essentiel en promotion de la santé : la participation effective et concrète de la communauté. En puisant directement dans les forces vives de la communauté, ce partenariat est porteur d'espoirs, mais également de doutes quant à sa pérennité. À l'heure actuelle, l'impératif de s'adresser également aux environnements apparaît une condition sine qua non. En effet, ces projets de mobilisation voient se profiler des contraintes structurelles. Bien que la tendance actuelle prescrive l'implication des personnes UDI dans la réponse au VIH, cette vision sous estime les contraintes environnementales. Or, pour favoriser des comportements sécuritaires d'injection, principaux vecteurs d'acquisition/transmission du VIH chez les personnes UDI, l'environnement semble prendre une place centrale à Québec.
La présente demande a pour but de jeter les bases d'une future demande de subvention de fonctionnement aux IRSC. Ses objectifs visent à ouvrir un dialogue entre des groupes d'acteurs aux intérêts divergents et amorcer une réflexion collective quant à la prévention du VIH chez des personnes UDI dans un environnement en pleine mouvance.",1 yr 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=174079&lang=en
174082,The stringent response and 4-hydroxy-2-alkylquinolines: a mechanism of antibiotic tolerance in Pseudomonas aeruginosa biofilms?,Nguyen  Dao,"Nguyen, Dao",McGill University,Qu&eacute;bec,Canada,200809,300000.0,CIHR Clinician Scientist - Phase 2,Salary Programs,Biomedical,Infection and Immunity,Antibiotic Resistance; Biofilms; Cystic Fibrosis; Molecular Microbiology; Pseudomonas Aeruginosa; Respiratory Infection,"Chronic bacterial infections are difficult to treat and often cannot be cleared by antibiotics. A devastating example of such infection is the Pseudomonas aeruginosa airway infection in patients with the genetic disease cystic fibrosis. Most patients acquire the infection early in life and remain chronically infected for the rest of their lives despite aggressive antibiotic therapies. These chronic infections cause severe respiratory symptoms, decline in lung function and ultimately death from respiratory failure. 

One important reason why antibiotics fail to eradicate the chronic infections is because they are caused by biofilms. Biofilms are a form of growth where bacteria live in structured clusters, embedded in a polymer matrix. Bacteria growing in biofilms are very resistant to antibiotics and the host¿s immune system and the mechanisns of this resistance are still largely unknown. 

Our preliminary studies showed that a stress response called the stringent response is important to the bacteria¿s ability to grow and stay alive in biofilms, and to be resistant to antibiotics. The stringent response is a mechanism that allows bacteria to adapt to starvation and many stressful conditions. We also found that the stringent response regulate a family of molecules called 4-hydroxy-2-alkylquinolines and these may be involved in the antibiotic resistance of biofilms. 

We are interested in understanding how the stringent response are involved in antibiotic resistance. Our studies are focused on understanding how the stringent response regulates these quinoline molecules, on defining the exact role of these molecules in biofilm antibiotic resistance, and examining whether these findings could be useful for development of future therapies against biofilm infections. With the lack of new antibiotics in development and the severe health burden of biofilm infections, new treatment strategies that target biofilms are much needed.",3 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=174082&lang=en
174083,Role and mechanisms of endothelial transcytosis during inflammation,Lee  Warren L,"Lee, Warren L",University of Toronto,Ontario,Canada,200809,300000.0,CIHR Clinician Scientist - Phase 2,Salary Programs,Biomedical,Circulatory and Respiratory Health,Cell Biology; Electron Microscopy; Endothelium; Inflammation; Live Cell Imaging; Sepsis,"Inflammation is the hallmark of many diseases, including sepsis (blood-poisoning).  Sepsis can develop when the body is infected with bacteria.  Even after patients receive antibiotics, sepsis may persist and, in its most severe form, can lower the patient's blood pressure so much that the patient's organs do not receive enough blood or oxygen.  This complication, known as septic shock, leads to failure of multiple organs and has a very high mortality rate.  
    It is known that patients with septic shock become excessively swollen, with fluid accumulation (edema) both in the extremities and internal organs.   Blood vessels of patients with sepsis are leaky, allowing fluid to escape and accumulate in the surrounding tissues.  This vascular leak prevents organs from receiving enough oxygen and may contribute to organ failure.  All the blood vessels in the body are lined by a layer of specialized cells known as endothelium.  One of the main functions of endothelium is to prevent leakage of fluid by maintaining an intact barrier.  The goal of my research is to understand how inflammatory states like sepsis degrade the barrier function of blood vessels, leading to edema.  Ultimately, this research may help to identify new drug targets for diseases like sepsis.",3 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=174083&lang=en
174084,Investigation Of Mechanisms By Which DISC1 Affects Neuronal Function In Schizophrenia,Wong  Albert H,"Wong, Albert H",Centre for Addiction and Mental Health (Toronto),Ontario,Canada,200809,180000.0,CIHR Clinician Scientist - Phase 2,Salary Programs,Biomedical,"Neurosciences, Mental Health and Addiction",Cortex; Disc1; Neurodevelopment; Neuron Migration; Schizophrenia,"Schizophrenia is a chronic mental illness that usually begins in early adulthood, with symptoms like hearing voices (auditory hallucinations) and believing that people are conspiring against you or controlling your thoughts (paranoid delusions). Most scientists agree that schizophrenia results from abnormal brain development that produces subtle changes in the way in which some neurons are arranged and located. Recently, genetic studies have identified a number of strong candidate genes that likely increase the risk of getting schizophrenia or cause the illness in a subset of patients. One of these genes, DISC1, plays a role in controlling the migration of neurons to their proper locations as the brain develops. However, no one knows for sure whether mutations or variations in this gene can actually cause the abnormalities seen in the brains of patients with schizophrenia. We propose several experiments to see if alterations in the DISC1 gene in mice produces the same kind of abnormalities seen in human schizophrenia brains, and how these genetic changes affect the way in which individual neurons move. These experiments  will show for the first time how a gene implicated in mental illness can disrupt brain development, and this knowledge will form the basis to develop new treatments targeted at this mechanism. Currently, all treatments for schizophrenia address only the symptoms, not the cause, and real progress in improving patient care will depend on more specific treatments based on understanding disease mechanisms.",3 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=174084&lang=en
174085,Peritoneal fibrosis and epithelial mesenchymal transition,Margetts  Peter J,"Margetts, Peter J",McMaster University,Ontario,Canada,200809,180000.0,CIHR Clinician Scientist - Phase 2,Salary Programs,Biomedical,"Nutrition, Metabolism and Diabetes",Epithelial Mesenchymal Transition; Fibrosis; Gene Transfer; Growth Factors; Peritoneal Dialysis,"Epithelial mesenchymal transdifferentiation (EMT) is a ubiquitous biological process seen in
development, metastatic transformation of cancer, and fibrosis. I hypothesize that EMT consists of a
series of biological 'modules' and each of these 'modules' (epithelial release, migration, and invasion) is
induced by different factors and involve different and redundant signaling pathways. The research
outlined in this proposal will use in vivo models of fibrosis associated EMT to further our understanding
of this essential biological process. In these experiments, I will induce peritoneal fibrosis using
adenovirus mediated gene transfer of growth factors. This will be combined with small molecule kinase
inhibitors and transgenic animals where key signal transduction elements are knocked out or inhibited.
These methods will allow us to analyze in vivo signaling pathways in EMT, to understand this process in
greater detail, and to develop targets for future therapeutic intervention. I see that this research will impact
patients reliant on peritoneal dialysis as we develop strategies to prevent peritoneal membrane injury, but
will also be important for patients with a variety of diseases marked by fibrosis - progressive renal
failure, liver cirrhosis, and idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis.",3 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=174085&lang=en
174086,Canadian Living Kidney Donor Safety Study,Garg  Amit,"Garg, Amit",Western University (Ontario),Ontario,Canada,200809,180000.0,CIHR Clinician Scientist - Phase 2,Salary Programs,Health systems / services,Health Services and Policy Research,Cohort Study; Health Policy; Hypertension; Informed Consent; Kidney Diseases; Transplantation,"Donating a kidney to someone you love has a number of dimensions. It is one of those areas in medicine where the surgical and long-term medical risks from having one kidney removed are balanced against the benefits of a longer and better life for the person receiving the kidney, and the psychological benefits from having helped a loved one in need. The surgical risks of donating a kidney are well understood. However, less is know about the longer term risks. This study will help us better understand the long-term medical, psychosocial and financial implications of living kidney donation. The knowledge gained will improve donor selection and informed consent, and guide best practices to maintain the health of previous and future living donors. A total of 620 people from 12 transplant centres in Canada will be followed for up to 7 years after donation. This will be the largest and most accurate study of its kind anywhere in the world. We will determine whether donating a kidney increases a person's risk of developing high blood pressure. We will also count all financial costs incurred by living kidney donors from the transplant process. Understanding these costs will guide the development of fair health policies (such as provincial grants, tax incentives, and social programs) which reimburse living donors for their legitimate expenses.",3 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=174086&lang=en
174087,Evaluating Mechanical Ventilation Discontinuation Practices and Research Recruitment Processes in Critically Ill Adults: A Research Program,Burns  Karen E,"Burns, Karen E",Unity Health Toronto,Ontario,Canada,200809,300000.0,CIHR Clinician Scientist - Phase 2,Salary Programs,Clinical,Circulatory and Respiratory Health,Consent; Critical Care; Mechanical Ventilation; Observational Studies; Research Processes; Research Recruitment; Weaning,"Weaning is the process during which mechanical ventilation is withdrawn and the work of breathing is transferred from the ventilator back to the patient. About 40% of the total time spent on mechanical ventilation is dedicated to weaning. Protracted ventilation is associated with ventilator-related complications and longer stays in the intensive care unit(ICU). Practice variation in weaning may impact on patient safety and outcomes.
      Research in acutely ill patients is distinct from other research; requiring consent from Substitute Decision Makers (SDMs), investigating conditions with high mortality, and implementing protocols under emergency conditions. Difficulties in obtaining consent reduce opportunities for critically ill patients to participate in research, prolong study implementation, limit the generalizability of study results, and delay identification of potentially effective and ineffective treatments. 
     The proposed research program will build and expand upon my current research by examining the impact of current practices (in weaning and obtaining consent) on outcomes (clinical and recruitment). The International Study of Mechanical Ventilation Discontinuation Practices will establish the impact of weaning practice variation on clinical outcomes, within and among geographic regions, and important predictors of this jpractice variation. The Consent Study, a multicentre, observational study, will examine the process by which Critical Care research is conducted in Canadian ICUs. The Consent Study will describe current practices in the 'consent to research' process and identify (i) factors that favorably impact upon obtaining consent, (ii) barriers to obtaining consent, and (iii) highlight modifiable factors in the consent procurement process that will enhance the feasibility of future Critical Care research.",3 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=174087&lang=en
174093,"Resilience, HIV/STI prevention and community action in the Tlicho communities of Northwest Territories",Gibson  Nancy L,"Gibson, Nancy L; Martin, Jim",CIET Canada (Ottawa),Ontario,Canada,200811,300000.0,Operating Grant - HIV/AIDS CBR Program - Indigenous,Operating Grants,Social / Cultural / Environmental / Population Health,Infection and Immunity,Aboriginal Health; Collaborative Research; Community Driven Research; Epidemiology; Socializing Evidence; Sti/Hiv,"In 2006 the Tlicho Community Services Agency (TCSA) of Northwest Territories funded 16 locally trained community-based researchers (CBRs) to conduct a baseline survey in the four Tlicho (formerly Dogrib Dene) communities. They documented Tlicho knowledge of STIs and HIV, risk behaviours, cultural strengths, resilience factors, and the status of available prevention initiatives and educational materials. This proposal builds on the underused baseline study to develop an evidence-based, resilience-focused, action-oriented knowledge translation (KT) strategy to socialize the findings from the community-based research. A follow-up survey will then evaluate the impact of this strategy on HIV/STI risk. The project creates expertise within the TCSA for sustainable evidence-based prevention of HIV/STIs, building upon and expanding the training of Tlicho CBRs. The project implements an evidence-based KT strategy, evaluates its impact, and produces a longer term proposal to monitor HIV and STIs among the Tlicho. The project consolidates the partnership between the TCSA and CIET -- recognised with a Northwest Territories Premier's Award in June 2008 - to build research capacities.",3 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=174093&lang=en
174112,Severe childhood disability: Optimizing settings for participation  and inclusion,King  Gillian A,"King, Gillian A",Holland Bloorview Kids Rehabilitation Hospital (Toronto),Ontario,Canada,200810,810983.0,Emerging Team Grant: Children with Disabilities (Bright Futures for Kids with...,Operating Grants,Social / Cultural / Environmental / Population Health,"Human Development, Child and Youth Health",Childhood Disability; Environment; Measurement; Participation; Social Exclusion,"This emerging multidisciplinary team will examine the 
environments and experiences of two groups of disabled youth 
who are profoundly socially excluded-youth with complex 
continuing care needs and those with little or no functional 
speech who use augmentative and alternative systems to 
communicate. The objectives are: (1) to develop a series of 
innovative techniques and instruments to assess the 
environmental qualities of youths' home and community activity 
settings, and their experiences of these settings (including 
physiological responses, and psychological and social 
experiences); (2) to conduct a study to (a) describe the 
experiences, participation, and inclusion of the two groups of 
youth (ages 14 to 21) in their most frequently experienced 
activity settings, using a multi-method approach (involving self-
report, other-report, observational, and ethnographic data), and 
(b) examine associations among environmental qualities and 
types of experience; and (3) to develop a long-term research 
program examining causal patterns and relationships among 
qualities of environments and experiences, with the aim of 
elucidating the optimal qualities of activity settings for children 
and youth with disabilities. This innovative program of research 
will lead to new knowledge of practical benefit to children and 
families, with implications for service organizations and for 
policy development regarding program design, ethical care, and 
social inclusion.",3 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=174112&lang=en
174113,GO4KIDDS: Great Outcomes for Kids Impacted by Severe Developmental Disabilities and their Families,Perry  Adrienne,"Perry, Adrienne; Bebko, James M; Minnes, Patricia M; Weiss, Jonathan A","York University (Toronto, Ontario)",Ontario,Canada,200810,323526.0,Emerging Team Grant: Children with Disabilities (Bright Futures for Kids with...,Operating Grants,Clinical,"Human Development, Child and Youth Health",Autism; Behaviour Problems; Developmental Disabilities; Families Of Children With Disabilities; Mental Health Problems; Multiple Disabilities,"This Proposal examines the health, well-being, and social inclusion of school-aged children with severe developmental/multiple disabilities (i.e., intellectual disability/mental retardation, often associated with genetic syndromes, physical disabilities, autism, and problem behaviour/mental health difficulties) and their families. These complex children are often excluded from research studies because of their multiple diagnoses, and they are often not well served by various systems, in spite of their high needs. Furthermore, parents of these children are under tremendous stress. We urgently need an ""evidence base"" of understanding outcomes for these children and families. Improved understanding will have direct implications for decisions made by families, service providers, and policy makers. Therefore, the first objective of this proposal is to produce a ""Report Card"" documenting the state of health, well-being, and social inclusion of these children and families, based on a large, nation-wide survey of parents from various locations and backgrounds. In addition to the ""Report Card"", three focussed studies will examine: (1) families' quality of life, assessed through in-depth interviews;  (2) children's participation and social inclusion in the community, assessed from multiple perspectives (including direct observation of children); and (3) service system utilization in adolescents (by means of a detailed survey). The Team includes researchers at different career stages, trainees, parents, clinicians, service providers, and policy makers. The proposal emphasizes knowledge mobilization to health, social services, and education sectors, as well as mentoring of trainees at different stages and in different disciplines in research and practice in health professions.",3 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=174113&lang=en
174114,"Developing Health, Education and Parent Partnerships to Promote Social Inclusion of Children with Developmental Disabilities",Minnes  Patricia M,"Minnes, Patricia M","Queen's University (Kingston, Ontario)",Ontario,Canada,200810,496912.0,Emerging Team Grant: Children with Disabilities (Bright Futures for Kids with...,Operating Grants,Health systems / services,"Human Development, Child and Youth Health",Developmental Disabilities; Education; Families; Health Care; Information Guides; Social Inclusion; Young Children,"The HELPS Inc. project has brought together an exciting team that includes parents, researchers, healthcare professionals, educators, and students.  There are five centres (Kingston and Toronto, Ontario; Montreal and Trois Rivières, Québec; and Halifax, Nova Scotia).  The focus of the research is on the inclusion needs of preschoolers with developmental delays or disabilities (DD) as they make the transition into school. There are several major goals for this research.  First, we will describe the social inclusion of preschoolers with DD in social, recreational and educational settings. Secondly, we will identify the knowledge, beliefs, challenges and actions taken by parents and professionals that help to promote social inclusion of preschoolers with DD during the transition into school. Thirdly, based on the information we gather, we plan to develop educational resources for parents, healthcare and education professionals and students that will help to increase their knowledge and provide them with strategies for more effective collaboration and promotion of social inclusion. Throughout the project, we plan to make the information we collect as widely available as possible. Findings from this project will have important implications for parents, healthcare professionals, educators, and those who provide services and make policy decisions.  This project will build a strong foundation for future research and practice.",3 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=174114&lang=en
174116,A Small-Group Intervention to Reduce HIV Sexual Transmission Risk Behaviour Among HIV-Positive Men Who Have Sex With Men,Hart  Trevor A,"Hart, Trevor A; Adam, Barry D",Toronto Metropolitan University,Ontario,Canada,200811,194370.0,Operating Grant - HIV/AIDS CBR Program - General,Operating Grants,Clinical,Infection and Immunity,Behavioural Interventions; Hiv Prevention; Hiv-Positive Populations; Men Who Have Sex With Men; Motivational Interviewing; Pilot Testing,"The primary objective of this project is to develop, implement, and provide an evaluation of an HIV prevention program for HIV-positive gay and bisexual men in a sexual health and community-based research framework. This collaboration between the Positive Prevention Working Group and researchers comes at a time when HIV rates have begun to rise among men who have sex with men, and when rates of unprotected sex have been rising among HIV-positive men. The project will build on evidence-based HIV prevention programs reported in the research literature, consult with leading developers and practitioners of prevention programs directed toward HIV-positive men across North  America, and engage local men to find the kind of program they would find attractive and effective.  A small-scale series of workshops will be mounted for four groups of a dozen men who have a recent history of unprotected sex. Workshop participants will subsequently be followed to discover the degree to which the intervention has a sustained  effect on risk behaviour. Findings from this study will provide the foundation for a subsequent effective, evidence-based, large-scale intervention.",2 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=174116&lang=en
174118,"Positive Spaces, Healthy Places - Phase IV: Monitoring and Evaluation to Understand the Health Effects of Housing Status in HIV/AIDS",Rourke  Sean B,"Rourke, Sean B; Greene, Saara; Tucker, Ruthann",Unity Health Toronto,Ontario,Canada,200811,300000.0,Operating Grant - HIV/AIDS CBR Program - General,Operating Grants,Social / Cultural / Environmental / Population Health,Infection and Immunity,Community-Based Research; Health Outcomes; Hiv/Aids; Housing; Quality Of Life,"The knowledge gained from recent HIV, housing and health research initiatives has the potential to change the housing landscape for people living with HIV and AIDS (and communities at risk), and improve their health and reduce the risk of HIV transmission. Positive Spaces, Healthy Places, funded by CIHR, is the first longitudinal community-based research initiative in Canada to examine housing, health and HIV. As part of our original CIHR study, we recruited and followed more than 600 people living with HIV over the course of 1 year to assess their housing status and the impact of housing instability on health and health-related quality of life. Our main findings so far demonstrate that participants face significant housing instability, considerable disadvantages in housing opportunities and support services, and substantial financial risks and discrimination that varied by geographical region. These findings also reinforce the notion that a number of preventable determinants of health are increasing the health risks of People with HIV while negatively affecting access to care. For Phase IV, we will collect ongoing quantitative data in a longitudinal, province-wide study design in which people living with HIV will be followed for up to 3 additional years. Changes in housing status will be observed, along with factors that play a role in these changes (e.g., social determinants of health, access to health services) and health outcomes and survival resulting from these changes. Our project team has already developed strategic partnerships with HIV service providers, housing providers and policy makers within and outside Ontario, and has had considerable success in KTE. With these partnerships and policy, program and community links, we are well positioned to ensure that our community-based research work can inform housing policies and programs that may lead to improved health outcomes and health-related quality of life for people living with HIV/AIDS.",3 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=174118&lang=en
174119,PARENTING MATTERS! The biopsychosocial context of parenting children with neurodevelopmental disorders in Canada,Rosenbaum  Peter L,"Rosenbaum, Peter L; Kohen, Dafna E; Lach, Lucyna M",McMaster University,Ontario,Canada,200810,359230.0,Emerging Team Grant: Children with Disabilities (Bright Futures for Kids with...,Operating Grants,Health systems / services,"Human Development, Child and Youth Health",Child Well-Being; Neurodevelopmental Disorders; Parenting; Population Health; Qualitative And Quantitative Methods; Quality Of Life; Social Inclusion; Systematic Review; Trajectories,"Parenting is among the most challenging of human adult endeavours.  When parents are raising children with lives that are ¿complicated¿ by long-term problems of physical or mental health, development or illness, parenting challenges are multiplied significantly. In clinical practice, there is an implicit assumption that the type and quality of parenting provided by mothers, alone and/or in conjunction with fathers, or by fathers alone, plays a significant role in the emotional, behavioural, social and quality of life outcomes of this vulnerable population.  Studies increasingly demonstrate the difference that parenting behaviours (what parents do when they parent), parenting cognitions (attributions, beliefs, representations of self as a parent) and parenting styles (patterns that best describe the nature of their transactions with their child) make to children with and without neurodevelopmental disorders (NDD).  However, less is known about how the social and family context of parenting makes a difference to how parents parent their child.  Similarly, the extent to which parenting is informed by child characteristics is not well understood in this population.  How mothers alone and/or in conjunction with fathers experience and negotiate parenting children with various types of NDD may be completely different from parents of children who do not have NDD.  We propose a number of related projects to answer these questions: a synthesis of existing literature, quantitative analysis of Canadian population-based data, qualitative analysis of interviews conducted with mothers and fathers of children with NDD, and a review of federal/provincial/territorial policies. Findings from these studies will lay the foundation for developing policy and practice guidelines as well as future studies that will evaluate uptake of this knowledge.",3 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=174119&lang=en
174132,Understanding the molecular role of the Werner syndrome gene product in preventing aging disorders in the general population.,Lebel  Michel,"Lebel, Michel; Guillemette, Chantal; Masson, Jean-Yves; Poirier, Guy G; Thorin, Eric",Universit&eacute; Laval,Qu&eacute;bec,Canada,200810,0.0,"Emerging Team Grant: From Genes to Proteins, Cells, Tissues and Patients - LOI",Operating Grants,Biomedical,Aging,Dna And Protein Arrays; Dna Stability; Molecular Biology Of Aging; Mouse Model For Aging Disorders; Oxidative Stress; Werner Syndrome,"Aging is seen as a progressive deterioration of physiological functions that impairs the ability of an organism to maintain its homeostasis and consequently increases its susceptibility to diseases and death. Interestingly, Werner Syndrome is a disorder characterized by the premature onset of age-related diseases. We generated a mouse mutant strain of the WRN homologue which phenocopies the human syndrome. The objectives of this emerging Molecular Mechanisms of Aging Team (MMAT) is to identify molecular changes (at the RNA and protein levels) with age in our mouse model, to identify directly in tissues the WRN protein complexes involved in the maintenance of normal homeostasis, to identify polymorphisms or mutations in the WRN gene associated with age-related diseases in the general human population and to determine the impact of different WRN polymorphisms on its activities in cells and tissues. Deciphering the functions of WRN in cells will provide information on the biological and molecular pathways affected in cells that regulate tissue aging. The long term goal of this team is to establish a network of scientists in Canada and abroad interested in understanding the molecular alterations associated with aging and eventually find chemicals, natural compounds, or drugs that will alleviate the abnormal molecular pathways in aging cells and ameliorate the health of our aging population.",1 yr 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=174132&lang=en
174136,"Integrating Genes, Animal Models and Populations to Improve Developmental Health",Lye  Stephen J,"Lye, Stephen J",Lunenfeld-Tanenbaum Research Institute  (Toronto),Ontario,Canada,200810,0.0,"Emerging Team Grant: From Genes to Proteins, Cells, Tissues and Patients - LOI",Operating Grants,Biomedical,"Human Development, Child and Youth Health",Animal Models; Developmental Health; Gene-Environment Interactions; Metabolic Syndrome; Population Cohort,"Recent studies have clearly established a relationship between sub-optimal intrauterine and post-natal development, and later life predisposition to adult disease, including type II diabetes, hypertension, heart disease, stroke and other neurologic disorders - a relationship termed ""developmental origins of health and disease"" (DOHaD).  While adverse pre- and post- natal development increases the risk of DOHaD it does not determine that an individual will acquire these disorders suggesting that interactions between an individual's genotype and the environment may contribute to the eventual outcome.  Increasing evidence suggests that premature activation of the fetal hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal (HPA) axis is a central component linking adverse pre and/or post-natal environmental exposures to later poor health outcomes. We propose to integrate population and murine developmental genetics approaches to investigate gene-environment interactions underlying DOHaD.  Individually these approaches will provide important information regarding the pathogenesis of DOHaD; however, integrating these approaches capitalizes on their unique strengths and will enhance our progress towards future intervention strategies aimed at reducing the burden of these disorders.",1 yr 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=174136&lang=en
174163,Role of c-Src in aldosterone and Ang II cross-talk in hypertension,Montezano  Augusto C,"Montezano, Augusto C",Ottawa Hospital Research Institute,Ontario,Canada,200810,86250.0,CIHR Fellowship,Fellowship Programs,Biomedical,Health Services and Policy Research,Aldosterone; Angiotensin Ii; Cell Growth/Migration; Cell Signaling; Cross-Talk; Fibrosis; Hypertension; Inflammation; Reactive Oxygen Species; Vascular Remodeling,"Compelling evidence supports the concept that combination aldosterone and angiotensin II (Ang II) receptor blockade may be therapeutically beneficial in ameliorating vascular injury in cardiovascular disease. Ang II is the principal vasoactive mediator of the renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system (RAAS), which has many actions including vasoconstriction, aldosterone release, inflammation and oxidative stress. Aldosterone, originally described as an important regulator of blood pressure and electrolytic balance, is now considered a key player in cellular processes underlying cardiovascular hypertrophy and fibrosis. Recent data have suggested complex interactions between Ang II and aldosterone in vivo. However cellular mechanisms and signaling pathways implicated in the cross-talk between Ang II and aldosterone are currently subjects of investigation. We identified a novel nongenomic signaling pathway for aldosterone, involving c-Src-dependent activation of p38MAPK and NAD(P)H oxidase-mediated generation of superoxide anion in VSMCs (Hypertension. 2005;46:1032). We also highlighted the importance of c-Src in the molecular and cellular processes underlying vascular activation of MAPK-dependent growth signaling and oxidative stress by Ang II (Hypertension. 2002;39:479). However, evidence for a direct role of c-Src in Ang II and aldosterone synergistic effects in VSMCs is still lacking. We showed that there is differential cross-talk between Ang II and aldosterone involving c-Src-dependent and independent signaling pathways (Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol. 2008;28:1511, Hypertension (in press). In VSMC, Ang II and aldosterone acting together through c-Src, leads to ROS formation and RhoA pathway activation. What remains unclear is how c-Src regulates cross-talk between Ang II and aldosterone and whether c-Src-mediated aldosterone and Ang II synergism contributes to the development of hypertension and associated cardiovascular damage.",1 yr 11 mths,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=174163&lang=en
174164,Regulation of the Fes tyrosine kinase by intra- and intermolecular interactions,Kofler  Michael M,"Kofler, Michael M",Lunenfeld-Tanenbaum Research Institute  (Toronto),Ontario,Canada,200810,101250.0,CIHR Fellowship,Fellowship Programs,Biomedical,Cancer Research,Cancer; Enzyme Kinetics; F-Bar Domain - Membrane Binding; Interactome - Protein-Protein-Interactions; Microscopy - Localisation Studies; Nmr - Structural Dynamics; Phosphoproteome - Kinase Substrates; Protein Tyrosine Kinase; Sh2 Domains - Phosphotyrosine Binding; Signal Transduction,"Protein kinases are enzymes that chemically modify (phosphorylate) other proteins and, as a consequence, modulate their activity, localization and/or association with other proteins. Therefore, kinases are central to the regulation of cellular growth and differentiation, and their inappropriate activation is a common cause of cancer. One particular kinase is Fes, whose role in cancer is not well characterized and which has been reported to have diverse effects, ranging from cancer formation to tumor suppression. Fes has been utilized as a model tyrosine kinase for some time, being used to identify functional and structural entities in proteins, called domains. These include the phosphotyrosine binding Src homology 2 (SH2) domain and the membrane binding F-BAR domain. Our recent structural and functional investigation of the SH2 and kinase domains of Fes shed light on their interplay, supporting the notion of a functional SH2-kinase unit. The study also set the basis for a deeper insight into the mechanisms of how catalytic activity of other kinases, such as Abl, is affected by changes (mutations) in the SH2-kinase unit which are associated with the development of cancer. 
The aim of my studies is to understand how the Fes kinase is regulated at a molecular level: For example, which molecules bind to Fes, what are the effects of these interactions on kinase activity, and how do changes in Fes localization in the cell contribute to the regulation of cellular functions? The identification of binding partners, kinase substrates, and their localisation will improve our understanding of the roles that Fes plays in normal cellular tasks and in cancer. Further structural analysis of the SH2-kinase unit will detail the activating effect of the SH2 domain on kinase activity. This will very likely help us to develop new strategies to interfere with the inappropriate activation of kinases involved in cancer and pave the way to discover new and more effective cancer therapies.",2 yrs 3 mths,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=174164&lang=en
174191,Role of phosphorylation in Neuroligin function and synapse maturation,Hines  Rochelle M,"Hines, Rochelle M",Tufts University (Massachusetts),Massachusetts,United States of America,200810,50000.0,CIHR Fellowship,Fellowship Programs,Biomedical,"Neurosciences, Mental Health and Addiction",Adhesion Molecule; Autism; Excitation; Inhibition; Neurodevelopment; Neuroligin; Phosphorylation; Synapse,"It is known that neurodevelopmental disorders have a strong genetic basis, yet the genes involved have not been clearly identified. Many of the genes associated with neurodevelopmental disorders, such as autism, code for proteins thought to be involved in synapse formation, fate and maintenance. In particular, mutations in multiple members of a family of synaptic proteins, called Neuroligins, have been detected in families with autism. 
In association with this, several lines of evidence indicate that synaptic abnormalities may be the underlying neurological cause of neurodevelopmental disorders. Many neurodevelopmental disorders exhibit patterns indicative of abnormal or halted synaptic development and maturation. Thus, understanding the precise functional roles of the proteins implicated in both synapse maturation and function may promote understanding of the causes of neurodevelopmental disorders. This proposal aims to clarify the role of the role of the Neuroligin family of synaptic proteins in synapse fate, maintenance and function. Specifically, we will explore how modification of Neuroligins by addition of a phosphate group, in a process called phosphorylation, can modify their function at synapses. Phosphorylation is of particular interest since it has been shown to act as a dynamic ""on-off switch"" rapidly modifying the function of numerous proteins, including others known to be involved in synapse development and remodeling. Ultimately, further understanding of synaptic protein function may promote the development of therapeutic targets for reducing the severity, or preventing the onset of symptoms of neurodevelopmental disorders.",1 yr 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=174191&lang=en
174194,Autosomal disease that leads to mitochondrial dysfunction; induced pluripotent Stem Cell (iPS) as a cellular model for pathogenetic study and basis for cell therapy.,Thiffault  Isabelle I,"Thiffault, Isabelle I",Montreal Neurological Institute-Hospital,Qu&eacute;bec,Canada,200810,135000.0,CIHR Fellowship,Fellowship Programs,Biomedical,Genetics,Ataxia; Disease Modeling; Fibroblasts; Genetic Characterization; In Vivo Model; Mitochondria; Neurodegeneration; Neurogenetics; Phenotyping; Stem Cells,"Mitochondria are dynamic organelles that are actively transported within cells and neurons. Maintenance of optimal function and transport is essential for the cell. Mitochondria generate most of the cell supply of energy. Although most of DNA is contained in the cell nucleus, the mitochondrion has its own genome. It encodes 37 genes and its proteome is dynamically regulated. Its central role in cell metabolism, damage and dysfunction is an important factor in a wide range of diseases that often present as neurological disorders, but can manifest as myopathy, diabetes, multiple endocrinopathy, or other multi-system disorders. Recently, many nuclear gene defects were shown to lead to mitochondrial dysfunction. This is the case in Friedreich's ataxia, hereditary spastic paraplegia, and the autosomal recessive spastique ataxia with leukodystrophy (ARSAL). Other diseases not directly linked to mitochondrial enzymes may feature mitochondrial dysfunction; schizophrenia, bipolar disorder, dementia, Alzheimer, Parkinson, epilepsy, stroke, cardiovascular disease, retinitis pigmentosa, diabetes mellitus, amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. Their common link is cellular damage causing oxidative stress and the accumulation of reactive oxygen species. A very recent field has emerged from the stem cell research; the generation of pluripotent stem cells (iPS) from individual patient fibroblasts that would enable the large-scale production of cell types affected by the patient's disease. It is suggested that these cells could be used for disease modeling. In this application, we propose to use skin fibroblast from patients affected by ARSAL to reprogram the cells to a pluripotent state, similar to embryonic stem cells. These cells will then used as a cellular model of the disease for a better understanding of the pathogenesis of an autosomal disease caused by mitochondrial dysfunction. It is believed that iPS cells could potentially be used for cell therapy.",3 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=174194&lang=en
174206,The epigenetic effect of abnormal folate metabolism on placental development,Watson  Erica D,"Watson, Erica D",University of Cambridge (UK),,United Kingdom,200810,150000.0,CIHR Fellowship,Fellowship Programs,Biomedical,Genetics,Chromatin Structure; Dna Methylation Analysis; Embryonic Development; Epigenetics And Imprinting; Folate Deficiency; Folate Metabolism; Genetic Regulation; Molecular Biology; Neural Tube Defects; Placental (Trophoblast) Development,"Folate (folic acid) is a vitamin that has been associated with normal development of babies. Folate supplementation is recommended before and during pregnancy and can effectively reduce the chances of neural tube defects (e.g. spina bifida). How folate affects fetal development is still unclear. But, in general, folate is metabolized by a series of enzymes in all cells of our body and its by-products are used to regulate how cells divide, how genes are turned on and off, and how proteins are made. Using a mouse model, we revealed that a mutation in one of the key enzymes that metabolizes folate resulted in complications in pregnancy (e.g. placental abnormalities) and birth defects similar to the effects of dietary folate deficiency. By studying the family trees of these mice, we found that even when the fetus and the mother did not have this mutation but the maternal grandmother did, it affected the development of her grandchildren. This implies that mutations in a grandmother can have multigenerational effects on her daughters' pregnancies leading to abnormal development and organ malformations in her grandchildren. The goal of my project is to understand the mechanism that causes this multigenerational effect and how it influences placental development. First, I will assess changes in inherited modifications of DNA independent of changes in DNA sequence that influence gene expression patterns in placental cells from embryos with mutant grandmothers. Second, I will characterize the morphology and function of placentas from embryos with mutant grandmothers to determine how the developmental potential is altered. Lastly, I will determine which birth defects are directly caused by multigenerational folate deficiency and which are secondary to abnormal placentas. These studies have important public health implications because they imply that the effects of folate deficiency may have multigenerational consequences which particularly affect placental development.",3 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=174206&lang=en
174214,Defining the Molecular Events Linking Growth Factor-Induced Signaling with the G1 Cell Cycle Program,Pennock  Steven D,"Pennock, Steven D","Harvard Medical School (Boston, Massachusetts)",Massachusetts,United States of America,200810,150000.0,CIHR Fellowship,Fellowship Programs,Biomedical,Cancer Research,Cancer; Cell Cycle; Cell Proliferation; Growth Factors; Multiplexing; Protein Phosphorylation; Proteomics; Signal Transduction; Tumorigenesis; Tyrosine Kinases,"Cell division is a fundamental process of life, and a process ruinously exploited by cancer.   Although it is well established that cells proliferate in response to growth factors, there remains a profound gap in understanding how the initial step of growth factor stimulation leads to a cellular commitment to divide.  Work from our lab has revealed that growth factors are required at two distinct stages in order to drive cell proliferation.  The first stage is a result of initial exposure to growth factor where resting cells are aroused and primed for further stimulation several hours later.  At this later time, further exposure to growth factor initiates the second stage, allowing primed cells to directly engage the cellular machinery required to cause proliferation. Although scientists have an excellent appreciation of the events initiated within minutes of the first stage and of the events following the second stage, the molecular events that entail ""priming"" and thus link these two stages are completely unknown.  The importance in understanding these intermediate events is vital not only at a fundamental level, but to understanding exactly how hyperproliferative diseases (e.g. cancer) function at the cellular level.  This proposal has two aims.  The first aim is to define the molecular events linking the two growth factor-dependent stages required for cell proliferation.  It is our hypothesis that growth factors prime cells by inducing the expression of specific proteins.  The second aim will be to test how priming and the associated priming proteins contribute to tumour development in animals.  We hypothesize that priming is an essential component of tumour development and that suppressing the function of priming proteins will suppress the onset of cancer.  These findings will ultimately guide the development of therapeutic targets and strategies to be tested in the treatment of cancer and other hyperproliferative disorders.",3 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=174214&lang=en
174280,Measuring the effects of atomoxetine and methylphenidate on working memory in children and adolescents with ADHD,Bedard  Anne-Claude V,"Bedard, Anne-Claude V",Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai (New York),New York,United States of America,200810,150000.0,CIHR Fellowship,Fellowship Programs,Clinical,"Neurosciences, Mental Health and Addiction",Adhd; Adolescents; Atomoxetine; Children; Cognition; Fmri; Methylphenidate; Neuroimaging; Working Memory,"Working memory is the ability to hold and manipulate information in one's mind over a brief time period. Working memory is needed for many activities in everyday life and is also essential for academic success. Many individuals with attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) have problems with working memory and with performance in school. Currently, the long-acting stimulant and nonstimulant medications Concerta methylphenidate (MPH) and atomoxetine (ATX) are widely used for treating behaviour in those with ADHD. As a result, it is important both clinically and theoretically to understand how these medications influence working memory in ADHD. Although the effects of these medications on working memory have not directly looked at, the limited evidence (based mainly on animal data and nonrandomized study designs) suggests that impaired working memory may be improved by both Concerta MPH and ATX. The objective of this study is to determine the effects of Concerta MPH and ATX for improving working memory deficits and associated functional impairment (e.g., school performance) in children and adolescents with ADHD. We will also be looking at how much medication is needed for the best response, and why some children with ADHD may respond better to one medication over the other. We will use computerized working memory measures, standardized curriculum based measures of academic achievement, and neuroimaging techniques in order to better understand how children with ADHD remember information and how medication impacts working memory. We predict that while many children will have better working memory and do better on school tests with both treatments, some children will do better with one medication over the other, because Concerta MPH and ATX work in slightly different ways in the brain. This project will contribute to our understanding of working memory and results will have significant implications for the treatment of children with ADHD.",3 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=174280&lang=en
174285,Structural and Functional Analysis of virulence-associated Clostridium perfringens enzymes: Insights into bacterial pathogenesis,Kunjachen  Jobby M,"Kunjachen, Jobby M","Queen's University (Kingston, Ontario)",Ontario,Canada,200810,135000.0,CIHR Fellowship,Fellowship Programs,Biomedical,Infection and Immunity,Bacterial Pathogenesis; Glycoside Hydrolases; Nmr Spectroscopy; Protein Ligand Interaction; Structural Biology; Toxins,"Clostridium perfringens is a common bacterium, which is responsible for food poisoning and gas gangrene in humans. The infectious properties of this bacterium rely on the enzymes that it produces and secreted in to the extracellular environment. We will determine the structure of novel secreted enzyme and characterize its function in relation to its putative role in pathogenesis. In particular, we will look at how regions of the enzyme interact with host sugars and cells found in the human gut and tissue. The results from these studies will provide new insights into the function of this enzyme in C. perfringens viability and pathogenesis. Findings from this study may contribute to the future design of novel antimicrobial compounds.",3 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=174285&lang=en
174327,Toward pharmacological treatments of mental retardation,Michaud  Jacques L,"Michaud, Jacques L; Boehm, Jannic; Di Cristo, Graziella; Lacaille, Jean-Claude; Lamarche-Vane, Nathalie",Universit&eacute; de Montr&eacute;al,Qu&eacute;bec,Canada,200810,0.0,"Emerging Team Grant: From Genes to Proteins, Cells, Tissues and Patients - LOI",Operating Grants,Biomedical,Genetics,Brain Development; Glutamate Receptor; Mental Retardation; Mouse Genetics; Synapse; Synaptic Plasticity,"Mental retardation is the most frequent severe handicap of children. A growing body of work suggests that dysfunction of the synapses, the site of communication between neurons, explains a large fraction of MR cases. Our group has found that mutations in the synaptic gene SYNGAP1 cause MR. Studies performed in mice have shown that Syngap1 is required for learning. The main objective of this project is to develop strategies to treat with drugs patients with mutations in this gene. We will introduce a mutation identified in a patient into the Syngap1 gene of mice. We will use three types of drugs that act through different mechanisms to rescue the synaptic and learning deficits in these mice. We will also performed experiments that aim at further characterizing Syngap1 function. This project may lead to the development of a strategy that could be readily explored in clinical settings and that could be adapted for the treatment of other forms of MR with synaptic dysfunction.",1 yr 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=174327&lang=en
174329,"Metabolite signalling and energy metabolism in hereditary metabolic disease, angiogenesis and cancer",Mitchell  Grant A,"Mitchell, Grant A","Centre hospitalier universitaire Sainte-Justine (Montr&eacute;al, Qu&eacute;bec)",Qu&eacute;bec,Canada,200810,0.0,"Emerging Team Grant: From Genes to Proteins, Cells, Tissues and Patients - LOI",Operating Grants,Biomedical,Genetics,Angiogenesis; Energy Metabolism; Signalling; Tumor Biology,"How do cells know when they need more energy?  We know part of the answer already:  if the sugar or the oxygen level is low, this sets off a signal to conserve energy and try to get more energy.  But this is not the whole answer.  Recently our group found that a molecule called succinate, which is formed when foods are degraded and are on their way to combine with oxygen, is a potent signal to make new blood vessels, one of the reactions of the body to a lack of energy.  This has provided us with new ideas about how to help babies with retinopathy of prematurity and adults with diabetic retinopathy, two conditions that cause blindness by causing too much growth of blood vessels in the eye.  We think that these and other diseases including cancer and diabetes may be influenced by succinate and other molecules that are produced during metabolism.",1 yr 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=174329&lang=en
174337,Identification and functional analysis of colon cancer associated splice variants,Abou Elela  Sherif,"Abou Elela, Sherif; Batist, Gerald; Beaulieu, Jean-François; Carrier, Julie; Chabot, Benoit; Perreault, Jean-Pierre; Rivard, Nathalie; Wellinger, Raymund J",Universit&eacute; de Sherbrooke,Qu&eacute;bec,Canada,200810,0.0,"Emerging Team Grant: From Genes to Proteins, Cells, Tissues and Patients - LOI",Operating Grants,Biomedical,Cancer Research,Alternative Splicing; Biomarkers; Colon Cancer; Drug Targets; High-Throughput Pcr; Rna Binding Proteins,"Colorectal cancer is the second leading cause of cancer-related deaths in Canada therefore several provinces are establishing population-based colon cancer screening programs. However, the current options for screening are limited by poor patient acceptance, low sensitivity, and high cost and new therapeutic targets for colon cancer are still needed. We propose to generate a new team to focus on understanding how the splicing program contributes to the development of colon adenocarcinoma and leads to the generation of tumor subtypes with differing phenotypes and responses to therapy. This new initiative represents a unique, genomic-scale multidisciplinary study with a direct impact on the health of Canadians, Canadian science and the Canadian economy. The biomarker discovery process has focused primarily on gene expression patterns while neglecting alternative splicing as a potentially rich source. In addition, most applied studies do not provide fundamental knowledge about the mechanism leading to the development of the cancer phenotype. The proposed project represents a unique mix of fundamental and clinical expertise. A successful outcome will revolutionize biomarker discovery strategies and reveal the vast extent to which alternative splicing modulates gene function. This project is a showcase of the CIHR emerging team initiative where a complete discovery pipeline spanning from academic research to the clinic will be built with equal contributions from academia and medicine. We believe that the impact of this project should not only be measured by the numbers of the biomarkers it produces, but by its capacity to change the way academics and clinical researchers work together to benefit the ultimate owner of all scientific research, the citizens of Canada.",1 yr 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=174337&lang=en
174343,"Inflammatory Bowel Disease: From Genes to Pathogenesis. A  multidisciplinary approach to defining how Gene Variations in  IBD affect Cell Function, Interactions with Bacteria and Clinical  Outcomes.",Brumell  John H,"Brumell, John H",Hospital for Sick Children (Toronto),Ontario,Canada,200810,0.0,"Emerging Team Grant: From Genes to Proteins, Cells, Tissues and Patients - LOI",Operating Grants,Not applicable / Specified,Genetics,Bacteria; Genetic Susceptibility; Inflammation; Inflammatory Bowel Disease; Innate Immunity; Mouse Models Of Infection,"The Inflammatory Bowel Diseases (IBD) are chronic disorders of 
the gastrointestinal tract affecting over 200,000 individuals in 
Canada.  Despite strong evidence supporting a genetic basis for 
susceptibility to the disease, little is known about its 
pathogenesis.  Recent genetic studies have identified more than 
30 susceptibility loci in IBD.  The major genetic variants 
associated with IBD cluster into several critical pathways that 
affect cellular function and ¿bacteria-host¿ interactions.  These 
include: intestinal barrier defence, autophagy and immune 
signaling. This proposal will define the deficits in these 
pathways that contribute to IBD pathogenesis in a 
multidisciplinary analysis of patient samples, mouse models and 
cell culture models. The consequences of genetic variation on 
patient outcomes will also be examined. These studies will 
further our understanding of the etiology of IBD leading to novel 
therapeutics.",1 yr 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=174343&lang=en
174345,Synapse Promoting Genes and Psychiatric Disorders,Craig  Ann Marie,"Craig, Ann Marie",University of British Columbia,British Columbia,Canada,200810,0.0,"Emerging Team Grant: From Genes to Proteins, Cells, Tissues and Patients - LOI",Operating Grants,Biomedical,"Neurosciences, Mental Health and Addiction",Autism; Brain Development; Knockout Mice; Psychiatric Disorders; Schizophrenia; Synaptic Transmission,"Schizophrenia and Autism Spectrum Disorders affect nearly 1% of the population, and both have strong developmental and genetic associations with 60-90% heritability among twins. Recent research identified genes that normally function to build synaptic connections between nerve cells to be altered in both autism and schizophrenia. Specifically, mutations in neuroligins have been linked to autism and mental retardation, and mutations in LRRTMs (as well as neuregulin, dysbindin, and DISC1) to schizophrenia. Mice engineered to bear autism-linked mutations in neuroligins exhibit impaired social interactions and have been developed as monogenic models for exploring and treating autism. At the cellular level, the function of neuroligins and LRRTMs to promote formation of functional synaptic connections between nerve cells is remarkably similar. 

Here, we propose to anlayze mice with mutations in LRRTMs, alone and in combination with mutations in neuroligins and DISC1. Assessment will include overall brain development; specificity, composition and function of nerve cell synaptic connections in development and in cellular models of learning; and behavioral assays for social interaction, depression, anxiety, and ability to appropriately filter sensorimotor information. 

At the same time, the genes encoding LRRTMs and other synaptogenic proteins will be sequenced in additional groups of patients with autism, schizophrenia, or mental retardation. Not only will this reveal the prevalence of disease-linked alterations in these genes, specific mutations sites will be mimicked in rodent models to understand how they alter function. It is our hope that the LRRTM mutant mice and ensuing multi-gene mouse models developed here will serve to better understand the molecular and cellular bases of these psychiatric disorders and thus to engineer rational therapies.",1 yr 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=174345&lang=en
174346,Evaluating the Role of Clozapine modulation of the GABAergic neurotransmission in Schizophrenia,Daskalakis  Zafiris J,"Daskalakis, Zafiris J",Centre for Addiction and Mental Health (Toronto),Ontario,Canada,200810,0.0,"Emerging Team Grant: From Genes to Proteins, Cells, Tissues and Patients - LOI",Operating Grants,Not applicable / Specified,Genetics,Animal Models; Gaba; Neurophysiology; Pharmacology; Receptor; Schizophrenia,"Dysfunctional brain inhibition has been suggested as a mechanism through which symptoms of schizophrenia occur. Brain inhibition refers to a process in which inhibitory neurons reduce excessive brain activity.  Excessive brain activity, in turn, has been related to the development of psychotic symptoms in schizophrenia. Several studies suggest that clozapine, one of the most effective treatments in schizophrenia, potentiates brain inhibition through its action on a specific brain receptor, the GABAB receptor. In this proposal we intend to further these promising data through a series of experiments including: (1) molecular experiments to further establish a link between the GABAB receptor and clozapine; (2) animal experiments that will investigate the effects of clozapine on the GABAB receptor in animal models of psychosis; and (3) human experiments intended to determine if the therapeutic effects of clozapine in schizophrenia occur through its action non the GABAB receptor.  Collectively, therefore, these experiments intend to evaluate the role of GABAB receptor mediated inhibitory neurotransmission as a potential novel mechanism through which clozapine exerts its unique therapeutic effects in patients with schizophrenia.",1 yr 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=174346&lang=en
174351,Generating insulin-producing cells from adult pancreatic stem cells in order to provide a beta-cell source for transplantation in diabetes treatment.,Razavi  Rozita,"Razavi, Rozita",University of Toronto,Ontario,Canada,200810,135000.0,CIHR Fellowship,Fellowship Programs,Biomedical,"Neurosciences, Mental Health and Addiction",Development; Diabetes; Pancreas; Regenerative; Stem Cell,"Type1 diabetes (T1D) is a disease characterized by high blood glucose due to lack of insulin production after destruction of pancreatic beta-cells followed by vascular complications that can devastate the patients' lives.  Islet transplantation has been reported to be successful in therapy of T1D, however a shortage in donor organ/tissue is a huge limitation for this treatment strategy. The ability of stem cells to expand, differentiate into specialized cells and potentially reconstruct tissues provides promising tools for treatment of diseases caused by tissue damage such as T1D.
Embryonic stem cell (ESC) research has attracted a lot of attention and is a very powerful implement in regenerative medicine, however the dangers of strong proliferative/tumorogenic and unpredictive differentiating capabilities of ESCs make adult tissue stem cells/progenitors a more reliable and attractive tool. Isolation of adult pancreatic stem cells that can differentiate into insulin producing cells is an important achievement that can provide a great source for islet transplantation therapies.
We have isolated adult mouse and human pancreatic stem cells and shown that they give rise to insulin producing cells ex vivo. The characteristics of these cells are not fully understood. This project is focused on characterizing the pancreatic stem cells and enhancing their ability to generate insulin producing pancreatic &#946;-cells. We also want to transplant these &#946;-cells into animal models of diabetes to test their ability in normalizing the high blood sugar. Successful achievements will grant a great source and potent means for regenerative treatment of T1D in humans.",3 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=174351&lang=en
174352,Emerging Research Team in the Leigh Syndrome French Canadian Type (LSFC): Translating LSFC gene discovery into treatments for patients,Des Rosiers  Christine,"Des Rosiers, Christine",Montreal Heart Institute,Qu&eacute;bec,Canada,200810,0.0,"Emerging Team Grant: From Genes to Proteins, Cells, Tissues and Patients - LOI",Operating Grants,Not applicable / Specified,Genetics,Biomarkers; Cytochrome Oxidase Deficiency; Energy Metabolism; Lactic Acidosis; Lrpprc; Mitochondrial Dysfunction,"Leigh syndrome French Canadian Type (LSFC) is an inherited metabolic disorder that usually kills children before 4 years of age. First described in 1993 by Dr Morin & colleagues, LSFC is characterized by an energy deficit and deadly lactic acidosis episodes commonly referred to as ""crisis"". The current incidence of this disease is 1/2000 and it is highly prevalent in the north-eastern region of Quebec where the number of carriers is estimated at 1/23. In 2003, Dr Rioux & colleagues identified the mutations responsible for the LSFC in the LRPPRC gene thereby enabling prenatal screening. The challenge is now to translate this information into treatment. Currently, therapeutic options for LSFC children undergoing crisis are practically nonexistent due to our lack of understanding of the (i) function of the normal LRPPRC protein, and 2) circulating factors triggering the crisis and precipitating death. Hence, we have formed a multidisciplinary team of basic and clinical researchers, which includes Drs Morin and Rioux, and will be leaded by Dr Des Rosiers, to tackle these issues using state-of-the art technologies. The ultimate goal of this team's research project is to identify molecules in blood that enable early detection and treatment to improve survival of LSFC patients undergoing a lactic acidosis crisis without any detrimental consequences such as brain injury. Our team includes pediatricians who treat children with inborn errors of metabolism such as the LSFC and work in close partnership with the Lactic Acidosis Association to insure rapid translation of research results to the target population. Anticipated findings of the proposed research go beyond LSFC patients as they may apply to other conditions involving mitochondrial energetic defects including common chronic diseases such as diabetes and heart failure.",1 yr 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=174352&lang=en
174360,"From Chromatin to Neurophysiology to Behaviour: Studies to Understand, and Develop Treatment Strategies For, the Autism-Spectrum Disorder Rett Syndrome",Eubanks  James H,"Eubanks, James H",University Health Network (Toronto),Ontario,Canada,200810,0.0,"Emerging Team Grant: From Genes to Proteins, Cells, Tissues and Patients - LOI",Operating Grants,Biomedical,"Human Development, Child and Youth Health",Chromatin Biology; Electrophysiology; Induced Pluripotent Stem Cells; Rett Syndrome; Transgenic Mice; Viral-Mediated Gene Transfer,"The pediatric neurological condition Rett syndrome is the most common cause of severe mental retardation in girls worldwide.  It is a monogenic disorder caused by loss of function mutations in the X-linked gene MeCP2.  To date, there are no effective clinical treatments.  

Several lines of mutant mice lacking MeCP2 function have been generated, and each develops a phenotype similar to clinical Rett syndrome.  However, despite knowing the responsible gene and having animal models available, our knowledge of the pathogenesis of Rett syndrome remains surprisingly rudimentary.  Recent work has demonstrated one salient and promising result: The pathophysiology of Rett syndrome can be reversed if MeCP2 function is restored to neurons.

Our team is at the forefront of these studies.  Members of our group have been the first to identify the correct form of MeCP2 expressed in the brain, to demonstrate a synaptic plasticity deficits in a model of Rett syndrome, to show phenotypic correction is possible in a gender-appropriate animal model, the first to demonstrate that in addition to repressing expression, MeCP2 also possesses gene activation function, and the first to develop induced pluripotent stem cells from both MeCP2-null mice and Rett patients, and among the first to develop Mecp2-expressing viral vectors for use in preclinical gene therapy trials.  To date, however, all of our efforts have been conducted independently.  We now propose to form a formal team to advance our efforts to the next level.",1 yr 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=174360&lang=en
174362,Emerging Team to identify and characterize the function of novel Parkinson's disease genes,Fon  Edward A,"Fon, Edward A",Montreal Neurological Institute-Hospital,Qu&eacute;bec,Canada,200810,0.0,"Emerging Team Grant: From Genes to Proteins, Cells, Tissues and Patients - LOI",Operating Grants,Not applicable / Specified,Genetics,Genetic Variant Validation; Model Organisms; Molecular/Cellular Biology; Parkinson¿S Disease; Protein Structure,"We propose to assemble a research team to work together toward the identification and functional characterization of novel genes causing Parkinson's disease (PD). The team will consist of experts in the fields of clinical neurology, genetics, and cellular and structural biology as well as animal models of PD. The strategy hinges on a coordinated two-pronged approach: First, the availability of a cohort of French-Canadian PD patients will allow large-scale screening of candidate genes in a relatively genetically homogenous population. Second, ongoing work on the biology of known PD genes in the labs of the applicants will provide unique insight to establish a list of 200 candidate genes based on privileged functional data. Most importantly, iterations of the approach, whereby the identification of PD-linked mutations in the genes further guide ongoing functional studies, will provide unique insight into the mechanisms of degeneration in PD, only possible via such a multidisciplinary team strategy.",1 yr 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=174362&lang=en
174365,Analyse de l'implantation d'une intervention communautaire de dépistage rapide du VIH offerte aux hommes ayant des relations sexuelles avec d'autres hommes dans la région de Montréal,Otis  Joanne,"Otis, Joanne; Rousseau, Robert",Universit&eacute; du Qu&eacute;bec &agrave; Montr&eacute;al,Qu&eacute;bec,Canada,200811,300000.0,Operating Grant - HIV/AIDS CBR Program - General,Operating Grants,Social / Cultural / Environmental / Population Health,Population and Public Health,Dépistage; Hommes Ayant Des Relations Sexuelles Avec Hommes; Implantation; Intervention Communautaire; Validation; Vih/Sida,"Des données récentes indiquent que parmi les hommes ayant des relations sexuelles avec des hommes (HARSAH) qui sont séropositifs au VIH, un nombre important ignore leur statut sérologique. L'ignorance de ce statut révèle que des HARSAH sont peu ou pas rejoints par l'offre de dépistage actuelle. En réponse à ces préoccupations, des chercheurs universitaires et communautaires ont développé le projet SPOT, une intervention novatrice de dépistage rapide du VIH offerte par des intervenants communautaires qui prodiguent les counselings pré et post-test selon les principes de l'entretien motivationnel et en fonction du profil du participant. Le but de l'étude est donc de rendre compte de la trajectoire d'appropriation de SPOT par le milieu communautaire en décrivant la mise en oeuvre de l'intervention et en documentant, selon le point de vue des divers acteurs impliqués, intervenants communautaires, infirmiers et usagers, les facteurs contextuels de tous ordres modulant l'implantation. Cette analyse d'implantation permettra de mettre en relief les difficultés qu'ils rencontrent, les opportunités dont ils profitent et les stratégies qu'ils développent pour réduire les obstacles et ajuster l'intervention. Une recherche participative de nature évaluative et formative, d'une durée de trois ans, est envisagée. Elle correspond à une étude de cas à niveaux d'analyse imbriqués. Plusieurs méthodes de collecte de données sont prévues : journaux de bord (coordonnatrice et intervenants), entretiens semi-dirigés auprès des intervenants et usagers, questionnaires de satisfaction des usagers (n=4000), groupes d'appréciation partagée. En lien avec l'Initiative fédérale de lutte contre le VIH/sida, ce projet participatif renforce les capacités des groupes communautaires et générera des données probantes utiles à d'autres organismes de première ligne (communautaires et autres) qui voudront implanter des activités de dépistage rapide du VIH.",3 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=174365&lang=en
174374,Immunomodulatory Approches to Dealing with Infection,Ma  Shuhua,"Ma, Shuhua",University of British Columbia,British Columbia,Canada,200810,22500.0,Fellowship - CIHR/Rx&amp;D - Wyeth Pharmaceuticals Research Program,Fellowship Programs,Biomedical,Infection and Immunity,Functional Genomics; Genetic Diseases; Infection; Inflammation; Peptides; Therapy,"We have been developing novel therapeutic strategies against infections based on the selective modulation of innate immunity (Nature Biotech. 25: 465-472, 2007). To identify further ways of productively modulating the human innate host defence system, we propose to study the impact of several diseases on innate immunity, including (1) monogenic human genetic diseases including Interleukin Receptor Associated Kinase 4 (IRAK4) deficiency and cystic fibrosis (CF), and (2) inflammatory bowel disease. Mice with defined mutations, received by our lab from our collaborator the Sanger Wellcome Centre in England (Gordon Dougan) as part of a large Genome Canada funded program, will be also utilized to obtain insight into both the mechanisms of perturbation of innate immunity and the mechanism of activity of our IDR therapeutic peptides. In particular we will use systems biology approaches and a series of novel bioinformatics tools, Innate DB, and Cerebral, to interrogate the pathway defects and sufficiencies in these situations. The ability of our current immunomodulatory peptides to at least partially reverse the immune defect in the patients will be studied and we will exploit the knowledge gained from these clinical situations and mice to design novel targets and small molecular therapeutic agents.",1 yr 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=174374&lang=en
174376,Unravelling the Disability Trajectory of First Nations Families of Children with Disabilities: Advancing Jordan's Principle,Woodgate  Roberta L,"Woodgate, Roberta L",University of Manitoba,Manitoba,Canada,200810,526581.0,Emerging Team Grant: Children with Disabilities (Bright Futures for Kids with...,Operating Grants,Social / Cultural / Environmental / Population Health,Indigenous Peoples' Health,Childhood Disability; Developmental-Social-Ecological Model; Ethnography; First Nations Families And Children; Interviews; Multiple Methods; Needs And Service Use And Delivery; Participation; Participatory Research; Photovoice; Policy/Document Review; Therapeutic Landscapes,"Although research is beginning to address the impact that disabilities have on Canadian children and their families, sorely missing is an understanding of the experiences of First Nations (FN) families of children with disabilities. A detailed understanding of the disability trajectory from the perspectives of FN families is needed in order to ensure that the best interests of FN children with disabilities and their families are promoted in health care. The purpose of this team grant is to arrive at an increased understanding of the disability trajectory from the perspectives of FN families of children with disabilities. Attention will be given to identifying the needs of FN families of children with disabilities, as well as the health and social services needed to meet their needs and facilitate participation in everyday life. First Nations families of children with disabilities from Manitoba will be interviewed about their experiences.  The potential contribution of this study is fourfold. First, this study will result in foundational knowledge specific to perspectives of FN families of children with disabilities. This study will give a voice to those families participating in the study and provide them the opportunity to articulate a broader vision of childhood disability that will extend beyond what is presently known. Second, findings may be used to guide policy and program development and evaluation of new models of service delivery pathways for FN families with attention to the type of services delivered, how services are delivered, and who delivers the care. Third, this study will provide grounding for future research that will include national studies and the development and testing of meaningful intervention programs. Fourth, the network that develops because of this work may serve as a model for future knowledge translation activities in the area of childhood disability as well as other health priorities in FN families, and across the country.",3 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=174376&lang=en
174377,Pharmacogenetics of depression: focus on hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis,De Souza  Renan P,"De Souza, Renan P",Centre for Addiction and Mental Health (Toronto),Ontario,Canada,200810,45000.0,Fellowship - CIHR/Rx&amp;D - Wyeth Pharmaceuticals Research Program,Fellowship Programs,Clinical,"Neurosciences, Mental Health and Addiction",Antidepressant; Bipolar Disorder; Depression; Ethnic-Related Differences; Family Based Association Test; Genetic Association Analysis; Hypothalamic-Pituitary-Adrenal Axis; Pharmacogenetics; Sex-Related Differences; Statistical Genetics,"Depression is a condition with many biological causes proposed but not one of these has been verified. Alterations of the hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis (a group of body regions associated with stress control among other functions) in depressed patients are extensively described. It also well known that drugs used to treat depression patients, called as antidepressants, are able to gradually normalize these aberrations seen in the hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis. It has been shown that families containing one depression patient are more likely to present a second person with depression than families that do not present this disease. Therefore, this suggests a genetic component to develop depression. Other researchers have shown that some people will have different response using the same drug (such as a painkiller) as well as have some side-effects (just some people report dizziness after taking an antidepressant), what can also suggest a genetic component to respond to a medication. Taken together, this information shows that disease and its treatment can present a genetic susceptibility component (this does not mean that who has a specific gene will have the disease for sure, it is an increased chance to develop it in a presence of some other factor). In this study, it will be evaluated if different forms of genes that produce proteins in the hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis are related with this susceptibility with depression and antidepressant treatment response. To do these analyzes depression patients' blood will be collected and using specific techniques their DNA will be read. After done all these analyzes we will be able to say if variations in genes at the hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis are or not associated with depression and its treatment. This information can help physicians to manage better their depression patients as well as be used to develop new treatment strategies.",2 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=174377&lang=en
174381,Impact of vaccination programs and antibiotic use on the incidence  of disease due to susceptible and resistant S. pneumoniae in  Ontario,Wormsbecker  Anne E,"Wormsbecker, Anne E",Sinai Health System (Toronto),Ontario,Canada,200810,55000.0,Fellowship - CIHR/Rx&amp;D - Wyeth Pharmaceuticals Research Program,Fellowship Programs,Health systems / services,Infection and Immunity,Antimicrobial Resistance; Immunization; Invasive Streptococcus Pneumonia; Surveillence; Vaccination,"In 2005, Ontario introduced routine childhood immunization with seven-valent pneumococcal conjugate vaccine (PCV7) which protects against seven common types of the bacterium Steptococcus pneumoniae.  Invasive (infection in a normally 
sterile site like blood or spinal fluid) pneumococcal infection is a serious illness that can have devastating consequences.  One aim of the vaccine is to prevent these major infections. Despite the immunization program, both antibiotic-resistant and antibiotic-susceptible invasive pneumococcal disease remain concerns.  These infections can be due to both vaccine-covered and non-vaccine-covered types of pneumococcus.  Using the Toronto Invasive Bacterial Diseases Network's database, the project will describe the rates of invasive pneumococcus by type in children and characterize antibiotic resistance in these infections.  The predictions of the study are that antibiotic resistance in children will continue to have increased throughout 2007 and 2008, primarily due to strains of the non-vaccine-covered 19A type of pneumoccocus; that cases of invasive disease in children due to  types covered by the current vaccine are due to incomplete vaccination rather than failure of full vaccination; and that invasive disease caused by vaccine-covered types of pneumococcus is less severe in partially-vaccinated children than in unvaccinated children. The results of the study will better characterize serious pneumococcal infection in Ontario's children and will have implications across Canada.  From the findings, we will consider the potential impact of changing the current immunization strategy (for example, switching to a new vaccine that covers more types of pneumococcus).  As well, we will be able to suggest appropriate antibiotic choices for pneumococcus.  The overall goal is to contribute to decreasing the incidence and harm of invasive Streptococcus pneumoniae.",2 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=174381&lang=en
174382,Synergistic effect of DNA-PK inhibitors in the treatment of colon  cancer,Davidson  David,"Davidson, David",CIUSSS de Centre-Ouest-de-l'Ile-de-Montr&eacute;al-Jewish General,Qu&eacute;bec,Canada,200810,45000.0,Fellowship - CIHR/Rx&amp;D - Wyeth Pharmaceuticals Research Program,Fellowship Programs,Biomedical,Cancer Research,Colon Cancer; Dna-Pk Ihibitor; Double Strand Breaks; Irinotecan; Oxaliplatin,"Colon cancer is the 4th leading cause of malignant solid tumors 
worldwide. An estimated 1,023,000 new cases are diagnosed 
annually and of these patients 20 to 25% will present with 
metastatic disease. In addition, 50% of patients with currently 
resected tumors will develop metastatic disease. As such a 
number of chemotheraputic agents have been developed to 
combat this disease including 5-fluorouracil, irinotecan (SN-
38), oxaliplatin and antibodies against vascular endothelial 
growth factor receptor and epidermal growth factor receptor. 
Despite these efforts surgical resection remains the primary 
treatment for colon cancer and the efficacy of current 
chemotherapeutic approaches while improved is still far from 
ideal. This failure is mainly the result of inherent or developed 
resistance to these drugs. Thus, understanding resistance 
mechanisms and developing auxillary chemotherapeutic agents 
to circumvent cellular defense mechanisms will significantly 
enhance currently available anti-cancer drugs.",2 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=174382&lang=en
174384,Developmental genetic determinants of chronic kidney disease.,Goodyer  Paul R,"Goodyer, Paul R",McGill University Health Centre,Qu&eacute;bec,Canada,200810,0.0,"Emerging Team Grant: From Genes to Proteins, Cells, Tissues and Patients - LOI",Operating Grants,Biomedical,Genetics,Diabetic Nephropathy; Genetic Polymorphism; Hypertension; Nephron Number; Renal Hypoplasia; Vitamin A Deficiency,The number of nephrons in each kidney varies widely from individual to individual. Recent findings suggest that humans born with low congenital nephron number may be at risk for hypertension and susceptibility to renal insufficiency later in life. We recently discovered common variants of key developmental genes that influence newborn kidney size in Montreal and identified significant renal hypoplasia among newborns in India where maternal vitamin A deficiency is rampant. We now propose to build a multidisciplinary team which will work together to examine the gene/environment interactions that determine fetal nephron endowment and put these individuals at risk for high blood pressure and progressive renal insufficiency later in life.,1 yr 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=174384&lang=en
174385,Autophagy Proteins as Molecular Targets for Cancer Treatment,Gorski  Sharon M,"Gorski, Sharon M; Bally, Marcel B; Lum, Julian J; Roberge, Michel; Young, Robert N",B.C. Cancer Research Centre (Vancouver),British Columbia,Canada,200810,0.0,"Emerging Team Grant: From Genes to Proteins, Cells, Tissues and Patients - LOI",Operating Grants,Biomedical,Cancer Research,Animal Models; Autophagy; Cancer; Medicinal Chemistry; Small Molecule Inhibitors; Therapeutic Target,"A biological process called autophagy has recently generated tremendous attention due to the recognition that autophagy is involved in various human diseases including cardiomyopathies, bacterial and viral infections, neurodegenerative disorders, bone disease, neuromuscular disorders and cancer. Autophagy acts as a guardian of cells, protecting them from adverse environmental conditions. In a similar manner, autophagy protects cancer cells from the damaging effects of anticancer treatments intended to eradicate them. Thus, a promising strategy to improve cancer treatment efficacy is to inhibit autophagy in combination with anticancer therapies. We have assembled a team of scientists and clinicians with the expertise required to develop specific and potent inhibitors of autophagy components and then translate our findings into treatments beneficial for cancer patients. Our focus will be directed toward late stage and recurrent/treatment resistant cancer patients that are in desperate need of improved treatment options.",1 yr 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=174385&lang=en
174387,Emerging Team in Chemical and Structural Biology of Cystic Fibrosis,Hanrahan  John W,"Hanrahan, John W",McGill University,Qu&eacute;bec,Canada,200810,0.0,"Emerging Team Grant: From Genes to Proteins, Cells, Tissues and Patients - LOI",Operating Grants,Biomedical,Circulatory and Respiratory Health,Cystic Fibrosis; Protein Folding; Protein Structure And Function; Protein Trafficking Diseases; Respiratory Health; Therapeutics,"Most cystic fibrosis (CF) is caused by mutations that cause partial misfolding and retention of the cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator (CFTR) in the endoplasmic reticulum (ER).  Despite great strides in basic CF research, there remains no cure.  We will determine the mechanisms responsible for CFTR retention in the ER, identify potential targets for small molecules that rescue trafficking of the major disease-causing mutant, establish functional assays and use them to evaluate molecular targets and correctors, and develop new research tools and therapeutic strategies that may be applicable to protein misfolding diseases generally.  The work will be carried out by investigators with broad expertise in chemical and structural biology, protein folding, live cell imaging of protein dynamics, CF pathophysiology, and drug discovery.",1 yr 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=174387&lang=en
174389,"Arrhythmogenic Right Ventricular Cardiomyopathy: From Genes to Proteins, Cells, Tissues and Patients",Hamilton  Robert M,"Hamilton, Robert M; Ackerley, Cameron A; Mahuran, Don J; Nanthakumar, Kumaraswamy; Scherer, Stephen W",Hospital for Sick Children (Toronto),Ontario,Canada,200810,0.0,"Emerging Team Grant: From Genes to Proteins, Cells, Tissues and Patients - LOI",Operating Grants,Biomedical,Genetics,Arrhythmogenic Right Ventricular Cardiomyopathy; Cardiomyocyte Culture; Conduction Velocity; Gene Transfection; Multiparticle Immunogold; Sirna,"Arrhythmogenic Right Ventricular Cardiomyopathy (ARVC) is 
present in up to 1/1000 individuals and is a frequent causes of 
sudden death in young individuals. We follows the largest 
cohort of (219) young individuals identified with ARVC, 
collaborate with adult cardiac EP colleagues, and are a North 
American clinical testing centre for ARVC genes. Six ARVC genes 
cause desmosomal abnormalities, with reduced connexin43 gap 
junction expression as a final common pathway. This slows 
conduction in myocardium, leading to arrhythmias. We seek to 
understand how ARVC gene mutations influence desmosomal 
expression and function and connexin43 gap junction 
conduction, identify genes underlying remaining patients with 
ARVC, and evaluate therapies based on the underlying common 
final pathways of ARVC expression. To achieve these goals, we 
will continue studies of gene suppression and human mutations 
transfection into  (HL1) cardiomyocyte cultures, assessing 
downstream effects by immuno-fluorescence multiparticle gold 
electron microscopy, dye transfer, micro-electrode array 
assessment of conduction velocity. These studies provide a 
functional assay for the effects of ARVC gene mutations. We will 
assess animal models of ARVC (JUP heterozygous mouse, 
TMEM43 mouse, Boxer dog) as well as our large bank of human 
cardiac biopsy tissue from individuals with ARVC. We will 
perform traditional assessment of protein interactions, 
evaluating binding partners as potential new candidate genes for 
analysis in our patient cohorts. We are also searching for the 
gene underlying Boxer dog ARVC, using a 20,000 SNP array, 
with a view to identifying a gene with a human homolog 
potentially underlying additional clinical ARVC patients. Within 
our tissue and culture models, we will assess potential rescue 
therapies in a high-throughput system, and evaluate candidate 
therapies for effects on connexin expression and function.",1 yr 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=174389&lang=en
174390,Palmitoylation in Huntington Disease (Palm HD),Hayden  Michael R,"Hayden, Michael R",University of British Columbia,British Columbia,Canada,200810,0.0,"Emerging Team Grant: From Genes to Proteins, Cells, Tissues and Patients - LOI",Operating Grants,Biomedical,Genetics,Huntington Disease; Lipid Modification; Palmitoylation Assays And Screens; Protein Trafficking; Synaptic Function,"Protein palmitoylation has recently emerged as a dynamic posttranslational modification critical for proper cellular trafficking. Our recent studies show that defects in palmitoylation are associated with dysfunction in Huntington Disease. We will effectively explore this process by using our novel proteomic technology to define defects in palmitoylation and their relation to HD. The discovery of enzymes that add or remove palmitate will be important for the identification of small molecule inhibitors that target these enzymes and the development of therapeutic tools. This CIHR Team brings together investigators who have made landmark discoveries in the field, including description of the palmitoyl proteome, and the first demonstration of altered palmitoylation in Huntington Disease.",1 yr 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=174390&lang=en
174399,Genetic and Epigenetic Causes of Male Infertility,Jarvi  Keith A,"Jarvi, Keith A",Sinai Health System (Toronto),Ontario,Canada,200810,0.0,"Emerging Team Grant: From Genes to Proteins, Cells, Tissues and Patients - LOI",Operating Grants,Clinical,"Human Development, Child and Youth Health",Bioinfomatics; Biomarkers; Epigenetics; Genetics; Genome Wide Association Studies; Male Infertilty; Proteomics; Transcriptome Studies,"Over 7% of men suffer from infertility.  In most cases, there is no known cause for this infertility and no way to improve the fertility.  Techniques like in-vitro fertilization (IVF) are in widespread use (over 1% of children born in the USA are IVF babies) and have allowed men with reduced fertility to father children, but these techniques are expensive and result in complicated pregnancies with higher rates of abnormal fetuses.  To reduce our dependence on IVF and to understand the risks associated with infertility, we must understand the underlying causes of male infertility.  This study proposes a systematic study on men with infertility to determine the underlying genetic causes for the infertility.  Eventually this should allow us to offer rationale therapies for the many men with infertility and also to understand the risks the children of these men face in their future.",1 yr 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=174399&lang=en
174400,Mechanisms of Motoneuron Degeneration in Spinal Muscular Atrophy and Identification of Therapeutic Targets,Jasmin  Bernard J,"Jasmin, Bernard J; Kothary, Rashmi K",University of Ottawa,Ontario,Canada,200810,0.0,"Emerging Team Grant: From Genes to Proteins, Cells, Tissues and Patients - LOI",Operating Grants,Not applicable / Specified,Genetics,Neuromuscular Junction - Mouse Models - Signalling -; Proteomics; Rna Stability - Rna Binding Proteins - Microrna -; Spinal Muscular Atrophy - Motoneurons - Skeletal Muscle -,"Loss of a protein named SMN, for ¿Survival of Motor Neurons¿, causes spinal muscular atrophy, a disease that affects 1 in every 10,000 newborns and is the leading genetic cause of infant death. SMA results in the massive loss of spinal cord motoneurons, which are the cells responsible for voluntary movements. Research in recent years has identified an essential function for the SMN protein, that should be equally important for all cells in the body. Hence, it remains a major challenge in the field to rationalize how loss of SMN can result in a motoneuron-specific disease. Our current research strategy will use novel state-of-the-art approaches to identify the proteins that interact specifically with SMN in motoneurons. Identification of novel components of the SMN complex may provide crucial insights into the function of SMN that is important for motoneurons and to the etiology of SMA. Furthermore, proteins found to be misregulated in SMA cells may constitute new targets for the development of novel strategies for therapeutic intervention.",1 yr 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=174400&lang=en
174401,Prostate cancer: Somatic genetics and novel therapeutics,Trifiro  Mark A,"Trifiro, Mark A; Corcos, Jacques; Purisima, Enrico O; Schirrmacher, Esther; Wang, Edwin",CIUSSS de Centre-Ouest-de-l'Ile-de-Montr&eacute;al-Jewish General,Qu&eacute;bec,Canada,200810,0.0,"Emerging Team Grant: From Genes to Proteins, Cells, Tissues and Patients - LOI",Operating Grants,Not applicable / Specified,Genetics,Animal Models; Prostate Cancer; Protein Structure And Function; Somatic Genetics; Systems Biology; Therapeutics,"Prostate cancer has become one of the most frequently diagnosed malignancies in men. Advanced prostate cancer can be a very lethal disorder. Prostate cancer is treated initially with hormonal therapy that lower androgen levels and blocks their action. This works well early on, but many prostate cancers later develop resistance to these drugs. Many times, prostate cancers have mutated androgen receptors that can change the way prostate cancer cells survive and makes prostate cancer very difficult to treat.
	  We propose that a comprehensive approach is needed to understand the consequences of these mutations and will do so with the most advanced genetic tools available. We will also embark on a new method to treat prostate cancer, one that does not use classical biological drugs. We suggest that non-biological methods such as chemical toxins, radioactivity, heat or light are needed to destroy prostate cancers. These are exciting new ways to kill cancer cells. Our team aims to target heat sensitizer molecules to prostate cancer cells and use high frequency ultrasound to focus heat energy on the prostate gland. Heat sensitizers will allow us much better precision with very little exposure to nearby normal tissue.
	To accomplish such a task, a special team of investigators has joined forces, each with their specific expertise. These include molecular biologists, system biologists, computer modelers, radiophysicists, organic chemists, and medical doctors who treat prostate cancer. State of the art methodology will be used (mass spectrometry, surface plasmon resonance, prostatic cell line studies and special prostate cancer animal models), so we can test high frequency ultrasound and our heat sensitizers. Thus, this team will be unique and we expect to learn much more about prostate cancer and develop new ways to treat this disorder.",1 yr 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=174401&lang=en
174403,Apoptosis Prevention Therapy for the Treatment of Retinal Degeneration:  Basic Science to Clinical Application,Tsilfidis  Catherine,"Tsilfidis, Catherine; Korneluk, Robert G",Ottawa Hospital Research Institute,Ontario,Canada,200810,0.0,"Emerging Team Grant: From Genes to Proteins, Cells, Tissues and Patients - LOI",Operating Grants,Not applicable / Specified,Genetics,Apoptosis; Gene Therapy; Retinal Degeneration,"Cell death via apoptosis is the final common pathway for many forms of retinal disease, including glaucoma, retinitis pigmentosa, retinal ischemia, age-related macular degeneration and diabetic retinopathy.  As such, any gene therapy strategy which targets the apoptotic cascade could potentially be applicable to many different types of retinal degeneration.   Apoptosis of the cell occurs through the action of a family of proteins called caspases.  Another family of genes, the IAPs (inhibitor of apoptosis proteins) has been shown to bind with and block the action of caspases.  Our research examines the efficacy of using XIAP (X-linked IAP) to prevent apoptosis in several forms of retinal degeneration.  XIAP has been shown to interact with and inhibit the action of several caspases.  It has previously been shown that XIAP provides a significant degree of protection in animal models of neurodegenerative disease such as stroke, Parkinson's and Huntington's disease.  We have shown that XIAP can prevent cell death in animal models of retinal ischemia, retinal detachment and in genetic forms of retinitis pigmentosa (RP). We believe that these studies provide significant proof-of-principle for XIAP efficacy in the treatment of human retinal disease.   The current proposal will help to establish a multidisciplinary team of basic and clinical scientists that will conduct all the studies necessary to develop the technology so that by the end of the five-year granting period, we will be in a position to initiate human clinical trials.",1 yr 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=174403&lang=en
174405,Kawasaki disease-From the bench to the bedside and back,Yeung  Rae S,"Yeung, Rae S",Hospital for Sick Children (Toronto),Ontario,Canada,200810,0.0,"Emerging Team Grant: From Genes to Proteins, Cells, Tissues and Patients - LOI",Operating Grants,Biomedical,Musculoskeletal Health and Arthritis,Animal Models; Costimulation; Elastin Signaling; Genetic Variants; Kawasaki Disease; T-Cell Activation,"The overall objective of our team is to understand why the body 
damages the blood vessels in Kawasaki disease (KD) and to 
identify new biologic markers that will aid in identification of 
children at risk for disease and develop poor outcome. KD is the 
leading cause of acquired heart disease in Canadian children. An 
infection starts KD. In a healthy person the immune cells, 
especially the T-cells, turn off after successfully fighting the 
infection. In a person with KD the T-cells do not turn off, they 
keep going and attack the blood vessels supplying the heart, the 
coronary arteries. We have evidence from two independent 
approaches that molecules, which regulate T-cell activation, are 
the critical factors that determine how T-cells are turned on and 
stay turned on. This project will determine how (the 
mechanisms), who (the genes, molecules and cells) and why (the 
processes) these T-cells are activated, stay activated and attack 
the coronary arteries. We will accomplish this goal by examining 
the genes, proteins, cells, disease processes and outcome in KD. 
These goals will be elegantly linked by studies in both children 
with KD as well as an animal model of disease. Our work will 
challenge current theories of disease but more importantly will 
uncover improved diagnostic tools to enhance disease 
recognition and individualize treatment, providing a logical 
approach to improving therapy and outcome in affected 
children.",1 yr 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=174405&lang=en
174406,"The Genomics and Proteomics of TMEM43, its association with Arrythmogenic Right Ventricular Cardiomyopathy and the translation of this knowledge to improve the health care of those affected.",Young  Terry-Lynn,"Young, Terry-Lynn; Connors, Sean P; Parfrey, Patrick S; Pullman, Daryl; Stuyvers, Bruno",Memorial University of Newfoundland,Newfoundland and Labrador,Canada,200810,0.0,"Emerging Team Grant: From Genes to Proteins, Cells, Tissues and Patients - LOI",Operating Grants,Biomedical,Genetics,Animal Model Mechanisms; Arrythmogenic Right Ventricular Cardiomyopathy; Ge3ls; Proteins; Tmem43; Translational Research,"The application represents a unique opportunity to capitalize on a Canadian discovery of the TMEM43 gene causing an autosomal dominant form of sudden cardiac death in 15 multiplex ARVC (Arrhythmogenic Right Ventricular Cardiomyopathy/Dysplasia type-5) families from the Newfoundland founder population in the lab of the nominated Principal Investigator (Merner, et al, 2008; US patent pending). This is the first association of the TMEM43 gene with human disease and the most significant discovery in ARVC research in recent years. The first ARVC gene (plakoglobin) was isolated in 2001 in an autosomal recessive form of ARVC (Naxos disease). Plakoglobin is a desmosomal protein, and this finding directed future functional candidate approaches so that subsequent ARVC genes encode desmosomal proteins. This ""looking under the lamppost"" approach has limited our view of ARVC and cardiomyopathies in general. The TMEM43 gene (ARVD5) represents an opportunity for a broader exploration as the protein has no homology to desmosomal proteins and may function upstream of a final common pathway.

ARVC is a well recognized condition and an important cause of morbidity and mortality. In particular ARVC is a significant cause of sudden cardiac death especially among young people. Of late it has been recognized that this condition can result from  different genetic mutations in multiple genes.
Unfortunately, the clinical diagnosis of this condition is difficult. Currently published Task Force criteria are employed as the ""gold standard"". However it is likely that this condition has both a ""concealed"" phase followed by a more ""manifest"" phase when typical clinical tests begin to demonstrate abnormality. Unfortunately during the ""concealed"" phase when there is very little macroscopic structural cardiac abnormality lethal ventricular arrhythmia may occur. This observation demonstrates the direct clinical impact improved diagnostic mechanisms will have on patients with ARVC.",1 yr 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=174406&lang=en
174411,Molecular mechanism of action of cerebral cavernous malformation proteins,Sicheri  Frank,"Sicheri, Frank",Lunenfeld-Tanenbaum Research Institute  (Toronto),Ontario,Canada,200810,0.0,"Emerging Team Grant: From Genes to Proteins, Cells, Tissues and Patients - LOI",Operating Grants,Biomedical,Genetics,Cerebral Cavernous Malformations; Diagnostic Markers; Protein Crystal Structure; Protein Signaling Networks; Vascular Development,"We propose to investigate the molecular function of three gene products associated with cerebral cavernous malformations, a neurovascular abnormality present in 0.1-0.5% of the population.  Affected individuals are predisposed to a lifetime risk of hemorrhagic stroke and epilepsy.  By investigating the normal function of the recently identified CCM1, CCM2 and CCM3 gene products that are mutated in ~84% of familial cases of the disease, we will gain an understanding of how these genetic defects contribute to CCM formation.  We aim to understand the cellular function of CCM proteins in normal and disease processes through an interdisciplinary set of approaches including functional and structural proteomics, model organism genetics and biology, as well as clinical studies.  Expanding our understanding of functional interactions mediated by CCM proteins will set the stage for non-surgical treatment options and the development of prognostic markers that are currently available.",1 yr 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=174411&lang=en
174419,"Signalling, Cell Architecture and Diabetic Kidney Disease",Quaggin  Susan E,"Quaggin, Susan E",Lunenfeld-Tanenbaum Research Institute  (Toronto),Ontario,Canada,200810,0.0,"Emerging Team Grant: From Genes to Proteins, Cells, Tissues and Patients - LOI",Operating Grants,Biomedical,Genetics,Diabetes; Dna Damage; Kidney; Podocyte; Slit Diaphragm,"Fundamental discoveries over the past few years have highlighted the key role of the podocyte in pathogenesis and progression of glomerular diseases that include diabetic nephropathy.  The objective of the current proposal will explore the role of the slit diaphragm complex, a specialized intercellular junction between podocytes, in the development of diabetic nephropathy. Our proposal is based on two key discoveries by members of our team: that intracellular adaptor proteins link signaling events at the slit diaphragm to the actin cytoskeleton of the podocyte and that mutations in a slit diaphragm protein are associated with the risk of nephropathy in diabetic patients. We will capitilize on these discoveries and the unique expertise of the NET partners to develop an in depth understanding of podocyte signaling leading to diabetic renal failure.",1 yr 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=174419&lang=en
174421,Emerging Team in Cystic Fibrosis Therapy,Ratjen  Felix,"Ratjen, Felix",Hospital for Sick Children (Toronto),Ontario,Canada,200810,0.0,"Emerging Team Grant: From Genes to Proteins, Cells, Tissues and Patients - LOI",Operating Grants,Biomedical,Genetics,Clinical Assays Of Lung Disease; Cystic Fibrosis; Differentiated Respiratory Epithelium; Induced Pluripotent Cells; Molecular Recognition; Small Molecules,"New treatments are currently being found through screening of compound libraries that, rather than addressing the consequences of the genetic defect, target the underlying abnormality in CF itself. However, the mechanism of action of most of these compounds remains unknown and the validation of these ""leads"" in relevant model systems and in patients is a major hurdle to drug development. These new therapeutic approaches therefore require a framework that clarifies the underlying mechanism of promising compounds and uses this information to improve their efficacy. In parallel, tests need to be developed that can be used to assess the efficacy of compounds in cell based assays, in tissue samples from CF patients and ultimately in studies in CF subjects. This will be achieved by parallel research projects on the cellular mechanisms of promising chemical compounds, the development of a stem cell based assay that can be used for compound testing as well as patients based tests that can show efficacy in tissue derived from patients and in clinical studies on patients. The ultimate goal of this research is to bring new therapies that will substantially improve life expectancy into clinical care of patients with cystic fibrosis.",1 yr 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=174421&lang=en
174423,IL23R as a confirmed immune disease pathway: a model for translating genetic discoveries into better diagnosis and treatment of common diseases,Rioux  John D,"Rioux, John D",Montreal Heart Institute,Qu&eacute;bec,Canada,200810,0.0,"Emerging Team Grant: From Genes to Proteins, Cells, Tissues and Patients - LOI",Operating Grants,Biomedical,Genetics,Cellular Immunology; Genetics; Genomics; Inflammatory Diseases; Proteomics; Therapeutics,"Given the recent successes in identifying genetic risk factors for common diseases, there now is a major scientific challenge to translating these findings into better clinical practice.  It is therefore imperative to develop strategies and scientific platforms to address this challenge.  Our Emerging Team will endeavor to meet this challenge with its initial focus on a biological pathway that has been implicated in multiple immune mediated diseases. Specifically, we and others have shown that genetic variation in four genes of the IL23R pathway (including the R381Q variant in IL23R) is associated with Crohn¿s disease, ulcerative colitis and psoriasis. Our Team, which includes basic and clinical researchers, has the diverse set of expertise necessary to understand the mechanisms by which the associated genetic variants influence disease susceptibility as well as to design and test potential therapies.  Our Team also has the structures and partners in place for the scientific planning, teaching, dissemination of information, and commercialization of findings. We feel that our proposal is of great clinical relevance as (1) this pathway is a current target in clinical trials; (2) we have developed IL23R specific bioactive peptide antagonists and (3) we are creating novel models for pre-clinical testing.",1 yr 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=174423&lang=en
174427,Vitamin B12 in Health and Disease,Rosenblatt  David S,"Rosenblatt, David S",McGill University,Qu&eacute;bec,Canada,200810,0.0,"Emerging Team Grant: From Genes to Proteins, Cells, Tissues and Patients - LOI",Operating Grants,Biomedical,Genetics,Animal Models; Inborn Errors Of Metabolism; Protein Structure And Function; Small Molecule Screening; Vitamin B12,"Our ambitious and innovative proposal on vitamin B12 aims to enhance translation of gene and protein research to medicine. It will generate new knowlege about inherited diseases involving this important vitamin and apply insights to common problems involving patients and populations. More specific objectives include studies on how gene products interact using a variety of technologies derived from microbiology and protein science. We will exploit mouse models to study birth defects and the effect of treating mothers during pregnancy on preventing developmental abnormalities. Using small molecule screeing, we aim to identify compounds that can bind proteins of choice, enabling exploration of specific metabolic pathways and targeted therapeutic approaches.",1 yr 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=174427&lang=en
174439,Smart Ultrasonic Hydrogel Sensors for Point of Care Analysis,Burns  David H,"Burns, David H",McGill University,Qu&eacute;bec,Canada,200810,150000.0,Proof of Principle Program - Phase I,Operating Grants,Biomedical,Circulatory and Respiratory Health,,"A team of scientists at McGill University has discovered that ultrasound can be used as a detection signal in combination  with uniquely derivatized antibodies (immunoassay) to measure the concentration of substances in biological fluids. Currently used immunoassays employ other detection mechanisms such as radioactivity, enzyme activity, fluorescence or luminescence. Preliminary results indicate that the new method is at least  as sensitive and reproducible as the conventional approaches, but is much simpler, faster and cheaper. Because of this, it is expected that the method could be used in hospitals as a Point of Care procedure for diagnosis. This means that the patient's sample could be immediately analyzed in the hospital ward rather than sending it to a central lab. Another advantage is the possibility of being able to simultaneously measure several different substances in the same sample. The method has been successfully applied to the measurement of a protein. Results obtained thus far have been protected by a patent application, now at the international stage.

 

The team is now planning to adapt the method to the measurement of small molecules, which could then be used for therapeutic drug monitoring, detection of drugs of abuse, and analysis of certain hormones. They will also determine if the method can be used on whole blood. The third aspect of the project is to design and assemble a simple ultrasound device dedicated to this new application.

 

Immunoassay is widely used for diagnostic purposes in cancer, endocrinology, infectious diseases and other areas. The total annual world market for reagents and devices is several billion dollars. The new technology being developed at McGill will improve health care by providing a new in vitro diagnostic technology that is faster and  more economical than existing approaches",1 yr 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=174439&lang=en
174440,Amyloid-Based Therapies for Type 2 Diabetes,Fraser  Paul E,"Fraser, Paul E",University of Toronto,Ontario,Canada,200810,150000.0,Proof of Principle Program - Phase I,Operating Grants,Biomedical,"Nutrition, Metabolism and Diabetes",Beta Cells; Diabetes; Islet Amyloid; Peptide Chemistry; Pharmacokinetics,"Amyloidoses involve the abnormal deposition of protein fibrils 
or plaques within tissues leading to extensive cellular damage.  
Amyloid plaques are associated with a number of disorders 
including Alzheimer's disease and type-2 diabetes which are the 
focus of our research program. Although each is unique, all 
amyloid proteins can under certain conditions assemble in to 
morphologically and structurally identical fibrillar or thread-like 
structures. This suggests that amyoid deposits are formed by 
similar mis-folding pathways and therefore therapeutic 
interventions to control these events may be beneficial for these 
diseases. We propose to address this problem with a 
comprehensive strategy that will combine biophysical and 
biochemical approaches to the development of amyloid 
inhibiting drugs for the treatment of diabetes. This will be 
accomplished in conjunction with the development of cellular 
novel models that recreate the pathological features associated 
with type-2 diabetes and provide test vehicles for the evaluation 
of these drugs. Our ultimate goals are to understand the causes 
of diabetes and to develop a means to prevent or delay the 
progression of the disease.",1 yr 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=174440&lang=en
174445,Monitoring progression of malignant tumors by detection of blood-borne oncogenic epidermal growth factor receptor circulating as cargo of tumor-derived microvesicles,Rak  Janusz,"Rak, Janusz",Research Institute of the McGill University Health Centre,Qu&eacute;bec,Canada,200810,150000.0,Proof of Principle Program - Phase I,Operating Grants,Biomedical,Cancer Research,Cancer; Egfrviii; Glioma; Microvesicles; Oncogenes; Prognosis,"Some of the most potent cancer-causing genes (oncogenes) produce proteins that reside on the cancer cell surface (membrane). This surface is not rigid, but rather can pinch out of cancer cells and be released to blood, as tiny membrane bubbles (microvesicles), containing cancer-specific proteins. We studied this process in the context of brain tumors (gliomas) and found that a cancer-causing molecule called EGFRvIII is a part of microvesicles found in blood of tumor-bearing mice and patients. Patients whose tumors have EGFRvIII may have a much worse disease than those who do not.  
We postulate that by testing whether tumor derived bubbles/microvesicles present in the patient's blood contain EGFRvIII or related protein EGFR, it may be possible to know how bad the tumor is, and whether treatment given to patients really works.  
We will develop an assay that could detect EGFR and EGFRVIII trapped in blood borne microvesicles with a greater accuracy and test this assay in various tumors expressing EGFRvIII or EGFR.  We will use surfaces that can capture microvesicles and quantify how much EGFRs they have. This could help monitor and treat patients with brain, breast, colon and various other tumors. No such assay presently exists.",1 yr 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=174445&lang=en
174446,Preclinical evaluation of antimicrobial ultrashort aminoglycoside- peptide conjugates,Schweizer  Frank,"Schweizer, Frank; Zhanel, George G",University of Manitoba,Manitoba,Canada,200810,150000.0,Proof of Principle Program - Phase I,Operating Grants,Biomedical,Infection and Immunity,Antibacterial Therapeutics; Bacterial Resistance; Cationic Glycoconjugates; Combinatorial Chemistry; Infectious Diseases; Multi-Drug Resistant Antibacterial Susceptibility,"Aminoglycoside antibiotics have been used clinically for decades 
as potent antimicrobial agents to fight bacterial infections. 
Although AAs exhibit potent bactericidal activity, their 
widespread use has been compromised by dose-related 
nephrotoxicity and ototoxicity. In addition, the rapid emergence 
of AA-resistant strains has instigated research efforts to develop 
modified AA-analogs that can delay or avoid acquired resistance 
by pathogenic bacteria. Previously, we have developed a 
technology that enables facile access to structurally diverse 
aminoglycoside analogs. Using neomycin B and kanamycin A as 
examples, we have shown that these analogs can restore potent 
activity against clinically relevant and multi-drug resistant 
bacteria including AA-resistant MRSA, MRSE, E. coli and 
Pseudomonas aeruginosa. In vitro toxicity assays show that 
these analogs have little or no toxicity against mammalian 
erythrocytes. In this proposal we plan to extend the synthetic 
work, the antimicrobial in vitro assays and in vitro toxicity 
assessment to amikacin and tobramycin analogs, the most 
clinically used aminoglycosides. The most active and least toxic 
compounds will undergo in vivo efficacy and toxicity testing in 
mouse protection models. Provided that promising in vivo 
efficacy and toxicity data are obtained the evaluated drug 
candidates will be licensed to industry partners to perform 
clinical trials.",1 yr 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=174446&lang=en
174449,Identification of novel compounds inhibiting viral infections,Sonenberg  Nahum,"Sonenberg, Nahum",McGill University,Qu&eacute;bec,Canada,200810,150000.0,Proof of Principle Program - Phase I,Operating Grants,Biomedical,Infection and Immunity,4e Binding Proteins 1 And 2; High Throughput Screening For Inhibitors Of 4e-Bp1 And 2.; Immunology; Interferon; Knockout Mice; Viral Infections,"Interferons constitute the fist line of defense against virus infection in most vertebrate animals. We previously reported that mice and cells lacking the proteins 4E-BP1 and 4E-BP2  were resistant to infection with a variety of viruses. We found that this resistance was due to increased production of interferon. Here, we propose to develop chemically modified SiRNA and small molecules which will eliminate or inactivate 4E-BPs function. We will screen for compounds which inhibit 4E-BPs activity. In addition, we will design SiRNAs that will decrease 4E-BPs levels. We predict that such compounds will boost the immunity of the organism and protect against Influenza virus and Human Immunodeficiency virus.",1 yr 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=174449&lang=en
174451,Bridging the Gap Between Mass Spectrometric Profiling and Practical Diagnostic Tests for Commercialization: Case of Chagas Disease,Ndao  Momar,"Ndao, Momar",Research Institute of the McGill University Health Centre,Qu&eacute;bec,Canada,200810,150000.0,Proof of Principle Program - Phase I,Operating Grants,Clinical,Infection and Immunity,Amino Acid Synthesize; Blood Transmissible Parasites; Chagas Disease; Computational Modeling For Neoepitopes; Elisa; Hybridoma Cell Production; Monoclonal Antibody Production; Western Blot,"Chagas disease (CD), caused by Trypanosoma cruzi, is transmitted by triatomine bugs. This organism is endemic from the southern USA to the temperate regions of South America and more than 10 million people are currently infected. CD can enter or be maintained in populations through migration, mother to baby transmission, organ transplantation and blood transfusion. Some experts estimate that there may be as many as 100,000 legal immigrants in the US and Canada who are unknowingly infected with T. cruzi. A commercial assay for blood screening has just been licensed in the USA (pending in Canada), this test is almost certain to suffer the same limitations as all other EIA-type assays introduced to date (continued transmission due to imperfect sensitivity and blood wastage due to imperfect specificity). 
We began a program to develop novel assays for infectious disease using mass spectrometric data directly as well as 'next generation' assays that exploit the richness of the MS data converted to standard platforms (eg: ELISA). Given our responsibilities as directors of the National Reference Center for Parasitology and the lack of screening tests to protect the Canadian blood supply from the transfusion-transmissible protozoa, our initial targets included babesiosis, malaria and CD. We have identified specific biomarkers to: i) diagnose CD; ii) give prognostic information (ie: risk of cardiac complications); iii) and can predict cure following treatment (neither of which is possible with current antibody-based tests).  We have generated polyclonal antibody against these biomarkers but these reagents are not very specific in Western blot. We propose to use the CIHR-POP funds to generate specific monoclonal antibody and bring this invention to a point where it will be interesting for a diagnostic company and further increases chances to license it to a commercial partner.",1 yr 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=174451&lang=en
174452,Assessment and Treatment of Binocular Vision in Amblyopia,Hess  Robert F,"Hess, Robert F",McGill University,Qu&eacute;bec,Canada,200810,126802.0,Proof of Principle Program - Phase I,Operating Grants,Clinical,"Neurosciences, Mental Health and Addiction",Amblyopia; Binocular Vision Assessment; Binocular Vision Therapy,"We have developed a novel technique for assessing and treating 
a prevalent visual disorder called amblyopia ( lazy eye).  People 
suffering from amblyopia can only see through one of their eyes 
when they have both eyes open.  We have found that if we 
present different amounts of information to each eye then the 
patient is able to see both images at the same time.  This 
discovery has been developed into an assessment technique 
whereby we measure how much difference between the eyes is 
required to achieve a ¿balance point¿ where both eyes can work 
together. In addition, we have developed a treatment whereby 
the patent is presented with stimuli tailored to their particular 
balance point and the difference between the stimuli to each eye 
is gradually reduced over time until both eyes can work together 
under normal viewing conditions.  This is a breakthrough, as 
there are no current treatments for adults with amblyopia.   Our 
treatment is non-invasive, is effective for adults and can be 
administered in a take-home video game format allowing 
children and adults to be treated in a pleasant and enjoyable 
way.",1 yr 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=174452&lang=en
174453,Bioreactor-based large scale production of a Tim-3 pathway inhibitor as a novel immunotherapy against HIV-1 and other chronic viral infections,Ostrowski  Mario A,"Ostrowski, Mario A",University of Toronto,Ontario,Canada,200810,150000.0,Proof of Principle Program - Phase I,Operating Grants,Biomedical,Infection and Immunity,Aids; Bio-Reactor; Glycoprotein; Hiv; Immune Therapy; T Cell,"One of the greatest mysteries of Human Immunodeficiency Virus Type 1 (HIV-1) infection has been to understand why the normal immune system is unable to eradicate or control this virus infection as opposed to other virus infections. Our laboratory specializes in understanding how one arm of the immune system, called the T cells, fights viruses, including HIV-1 virus, the virus that causes AIDS (acquired immunodeficiency syndrome). It has been found that these T cells that are supposed to fight HIV-1 do a bad job, and have been called dys-functional, or ¿exhausted¿. Recently a clue to why these T cells are exhausted was demonstrated by numerous publications that have identified a new molecule on the surface of these exhausted cells called PD-1. We have now identified, another new molecule on the surface of these exhausted T cells called Tim-3 (T cell immunoglobulin mucin molecule type 3). We have found that Tim-3 identifies the most exhausted of these T cells. We also show that by blocking the action of this Tim-3 molecule on the T cell, we can rescue the function of these cells to fight HIV better. The current proposal will be used to develop a new immune therapy using state of the art technology and will be tested in the test tube and animals prior to use in humans.",1 yr 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=174453&lang=en
174545,Functional genomic dissection of FAAH2 role in the sex-specific aspects of hypertension and obesity in French-Canadian families,Noel  Audrey,"Noel, Audrey",Centre hospitalier de l'Universit&eacute; de Montr&eacute;al (CHUM),Qu&eacute;bec,Canada,200810,19000.0,Doctoral Research Award - Hypertension Prevention,Studentship Programs,Biomedical,Circulatory and Respiratory Health,Chromosome X; Functional Genomics; Genotype; Hypertension; Phenotype; Sex Specific Genetic Determinants; Single Nucleotide Polymorphism,"Sexual dimorphism of blood pressure is well established. The sexual chromosome X, presents in one copy in men and two copies in women, is a potential candidate for this observation. Nevertheless, the mechanisms of the specific X chromosome implication in this effect are not clearly defined. We have detected a significant association between the fatty acid amide hydrolase 2 (FAAH2), an X chromosome gene, and blood pressure level. The main goal of the proposed research is to undertake a comprehensive genetic evaluation of FAAH2 to assess its causality. This project aims to identify the biological pathways between this gene and blood pressure regulation. We will verify the biological function of FAAH2 in the French Canadian population, a Czech cohort as well as rat models. Consequently, a better understanding of the sex-linked pattern in blood pressure determination may help to identify the real sex-specific therapeutic needs. This new knowledge will bring the possibility to improve the personalised aspect of medical management of hypertension in patients for whom current medications are not fully effective.",2 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=174545&lang=en
174602,An Ethics Approach to Canadians' Decision-Making in Medical Tourism,Crooks  Valorie A,"Crooks, Valorie A","Simon Fraser University (Burnaby, B.C.)",British Columbia,Canada,200810,88131.0,Catalyst Grant: Ethics,Operating Grants,Health systems / services,Health Services and Policy Research,Canada; Decision-Making; Ethics; Medical Tourism; Qualitative; Surgery,"Medical tourism is becoming popular due to the increasing affordability of international travel, competitive pricing at destinations, and improved medical and technological capacaties at numous destination locations.  Because of this, increasing numbers of Canadians are engaging in medical tourism.  Our focus is on decision-making regarding Canadians' involvement in medical tourism.  We specifically aim to:
(1)conduct a scoping review to determine decision-making factors and considerations in both health care travel and tourism destination selection;(2)based on the scoping review, create a decision-making framework that identifies potential ethical dilemmas or considerations in the decision-making process for medical tourism and undertake a process of consultation with experts from the ethics, health services, and tourism fields in order to refine it; and(3)undertake a limited number of interviews with workers at medical tourism booking companies in Canada and also Canadians who have engaged in medical tourism in order to test the framework and enhance our knowledge about the Canadian context of medical tourism. The resulting decision-making framework will serve as an important contribution to the very limited medical tourism literature.",2 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=174602&lang=en
174604,Exploring Ethical Practice in Palliative Home Care Using Appreciative Inquiry,Edwards  Marie P,"Edwards, Marie P; Mcclement, Susan E",University of Manitoba,Manitoba,Canada,200810,66462.0,Catalyst Grant: Ethics,Operating Grants,Health systems / services,Health Services and Policy Research,Appreciative Inquiry; Ethics; Palliative Home Care,"Research has shown that a significant number of Canadians wish to die in their homes.  There is also evidence to suggest that family members do not feel they have the skills needed to care for their loved ones in their homes and may not see themselves as having a choice in terms of keeping them there.  This may create tension in families and result in ethical concerns for both families and health care team members.  At present, our knowledge of ethical practice in the context of the care of individuals dying at home is limited.  Our research team is interested in exploring ethical practice in palliative home care.  The purpose of the proposed two-year study is to explore and describe ethical practice in palliative home care from the perspective of palliative home care team members, patients, and family members.",2 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=174604&lang=en
174606,"Evaluating the effectiveness of hospital-based ethics programs:  a pilot study to identify key benchmarks, indicators, and success factors",Gibson  Jennifer,"Gibson, Jennifer",University of Toronto,Ontario,Canada,200810,98614.0,Catalyst Grant: Ethics,Operating Grants,Health systems / services,Health Services and Policy Research,Benchmarks; Effectiveness; Hospital Ethics Programs; Program Evaluation; Qualitative Methods,"Ethical issues arise in patient care, clinical research, and management decision-making in health care organizations.  Canadian hospitals are increasingly investing resources in ethics programs to help address these issues.  With this growing investment, there is growing interest in evaluating the impact and effectiveness of hospital ethics programs.  The purpose of this study is to identify key indicators, benchmarks, and success factors to evaluate the effectiveness of hospital-based ethics programs and to examine the impact of three interventions designed to strengthen ethics program effectiveness.",2 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=174606&lang=en
174607,Promoting innate immunity to HIV infection by vaccine delivery of third generation RNA analogs,Langlois  Marc-Andre,"Langlois, Marc-Andre",Universit&eacute; Laval,Qu&eacute;bec,Canada,200811,100000.0,Catalyst Grant: HIV/AIDS Vaccine Discovery Research (Can HIV Vaccine Initiative),Operating Grants,Biomedical,Infection and Immunity,Apobec3g; Hiv; Locked Nucleic Acids; Vif,"Infection by the human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) can lead to a progressive deterioration of the body's immune system. AIDS (Acquired Immunodeficiency Syndrome) represents the stage when a HIV-infected individual's life is threatened by common pathogens that are normally destroyed by the immune system of healthy individuals. HIV is a retrovirus that has evolved to circumvent the human immune system in such ways that no cure or vaccine has yet been successfully developed. One of the virus' survival strategies is to cripple conventional adaptive immune responses that are essential for the effectiveness of most vaccines because the cells of the immune system themselves are its target. Nevertheless, there are several endogenous factors that can protect humans against the spread of HIV infection. One of these antiviral factors is a protein called APOBEC3G that is part of the innate component of the immune system. This protein can bind and heavily mutate HIV DNA, ultimately leading to the inactivation and destruction of the virus. Unfortunately, HIV encodes a protein called Vif that is dedicated to specifically induce the degradation of APOBEC3G. The overall aim of this catalyst grant proposal is to validate a new Vif-inhibiting technology that could lead to the development of a vaccine that could induce the inactivation infectious HIV particles in HIV/AIDS patients and also promote the elimination of HIV infected cells by recruiting the intrinsic antiviral properties of the innate immune system.",1 yr 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=174607&lang=en
174610,Heteroclitic Peptides to Increase Human Immunodeficiency Virus-specific CD8+ T cell Interleukin-2 Production,Grant  Michael D,"Grant, Michael D",Memorial University of Newfoundland,Newfoundland and Labrador,Canada,200811,100000.0,Catalyst Grant: HIV/AIDS Vaccine Discovery Research (Can HIV Vaccine Initiative),Operating Grants,Biomedical,Infection and Immunity,Chronic Human Immunodeficiency Virus Infection; Cytotoxicity; Elispot; Heteroclitic Peptides; Interleukin-2; T Cell Receptor Avidity,"Vaccines administered to individuals already infected with a pathogen are called thrapeutic vaccines.  In chronic human immunofdeficiency virus (HIV) infection,therapeutic vaccines stimulate pre-existing and new immunity against HIV.  If boosted immunity more effectively suppresses HIV replication, this could offer broader treatment options where antiretroviral drugs are not widely available and reduce dependence on antiretroviral drugs elsewhere.  While therapeutic vaccines tend to focus on conserved portions of HIV or sequences known to be present in the infected individuals, we plan to test sequence variants that arise rarely in nature.  Our hypothesis is that the immune system rapidly selects against variants that are more immunogenic than common sequences.  Therefore, such sequences as rarely occur naturally in HIV may be more effective in therapeutic vaccines than the common sequences currently employed.  Our research project aims to demonstrate this possibility and identify HIV peptide sequence variants with this characteristic for inclusion in future therapeutic HIV vaccines.",1 yr 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=174610&lang=en
174611,A new human cell experimental system for evaluating prototype HIV-1 vaccines,Tremblay  Michel J,"Tremblay, Michel J",Universit&eacute; Laval,Qu&eacute;bec,Canada,200811,100000.0,Catalyst Grant: HIV/AIDS Vaccine Discovery Research (Can HIV Vaccine Initiative),Operating Grants,Biomedical,Infection and Immunity,Hiv; Human Lymphoid Tissue; Vaccine,"The development of an effective vaccine against human immunodeficiency virus type-1 (HIV-1) has proven an enormous scientific challenge that is partly due to the lack of a suitable experimental cell system to investigate protective immune responses to HIV-1.
Previous studies have shown that secondary lymphoid organs constitute preferred anatomical sites for HIV-1 replication and propagation. 
Given that secondary lymphoid organs are essential for the development of effective immune responses, we are proposing to test whether human lymphoid tissue cultured ex vivo could represent an appropriate experimental cell system to critically evaluate candidate HIV-1 vaccines.",1 yr 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=174611&lang=en
174628,The Potential of the Human Proton Coupled Folate Transporter as a Novel Approach for Therapeutic Targeting of Solid Tumors,Kugel  Sita,"Kugel, Sita",Wayne State University (Michigan),Michigan,United States of America,200810,81000.0,CIHR Doctoral Research Award,Studentship Programs,Biomedical,Cancer Research,Antifolates; Chemotherapy; Drug Discovery; Folate; Membrane Transport; Microenvironment; Proton Coupled Folate Transporter; Solid Tumors; Tumor Targeting,"Folates are B vitamins and are essential for life because of their role in DNA synthesis. A cancer cell proliferates in an uncontrolled manner and is highly dependent on DNA synthesis. Antifolates are folate analogs that inhibit the ability of cancer cells to make DNA and replicate, which leads to cancer cell death. Folates and antifolates cannot enter cells on their own and therefore require specific transport proteins. This application for a doctoral research award proposes to better understand the biology and therapeutic potential of the human proton-coupled folate transporter (hPCFT), a major system for collecting folates and antifolates in human tumors and some normal tissues. hPCFT prefers an acidic pH for transport and is directly relevant to cancer therapy as the environment in many tumors tends to be acidic. This, paired with our identification of novel antifolate drugs that are specifically transported by hPCFT but not other major folate transporters provides a means of targeting toxic drugs to tumors, reducing toxic side effects on normal tissues. Proposed studies will determine the therapeutic potential of hPCFT by measuring hPCFT levels and function in tumors compared to normal tissues. In addition, studies will establish relative levels of hPCFT compared to other folate transporters and determine how much hPCFT is required for drug transport and cancer cell killing. Finally, this proposal will seek to determine the therapeutic impact of multiple and redundant folate transport systems on hPCFT-mediated drug accumulation and tumor toxicity. A better understanding of folate transport has implications to human health and disease, relating to folate deficiency and its impact on cardiovascular disease, fetal abnormalities and neurologic disorders. In addition, the development of a new class of tumor-selective cancer drugs as proposed may lead to new therapies and provide new treatment options and less toxicity for cancer patients treated with chemotherapy.",3 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=174628&lang=en
174634,Copy number variants analysis in hypertension and its associated metabolic components,Ivanga  Mahine,"Ivanga, Mahine",Centre hospitalier de l'Universit&eacute; de Montr&eacute;al (CHUM),Qu&eacute;bec,Canada,200810,19000.0,Doctoral Research Award - Hypertension Prevention,Studentship Programs,Social / Cultural / Environmental / Population Health,Genetics,Bioinformatics; Complex Traits; Copy Number Variation; Epidemiology Genetics; Genotyping Arrays; High Blood Pressure; Human Genomics; Metabolic Syndrome; Molecular Biology; Polymorphisms,"Hypertension is a disease with increasing frequency in western as well as in transition-economy countries. As many genetic and environmental factors participate and interact in the development of hypertension, the identification of genes involved in altered blood pressure regulation is rather complicated. New genome-wide scanning methodologies enable the detection of larger-sized variability in genomes such as Copy Number Variant (CNV) which represents change (gain or loss) in copy number of DNA fragments of at least 1 KB compared to the reference genome, often resulting in an increase or decrease of the gene product. Although DNA copy number variation phenomenon has been known for a long time, it has only recently been reported to be widely present in the human genome, potentially accounting for important source of variation in genomic components of complex traits like blood pressure. Some CNVs have already been shown to be involved in disease such as Parkinson, Alzheimer, autism or HIV-1 infection susceptibility. The present study aims to investigate, using Affymetrix DNA Mapping arrays, genome-wide characteristics of CNVs in unique set of 75 French-Canadian families (from Saguenay-Lac St-Jean region of Quebec) affected by hypertension. In combination with available data on hundreds of rigorously acquired blood pressure, body composition and metabolic traits and complete annotation of the ancestry back to 17th century, we plan to identify CNVs linked to or associated with hypertension and related metabolic abnormalities and conferring risk for or protection from this disease. Hence, this project will contribute to elucidate the role of CNVs as hereditary component of hypertension, and, for the first time, to analyze in depth their familial transmission in uniquely disposed cohorts. The identification of pathogenic CNVs will help to elaborate tools for early diagnosis and targeted prevention strategies.",2 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=174634&lang=en
174641,Engineering an RNA binding protein with new specificity to control gene expression,Mandic  Jana,"Mandic, Jana",University of Washington (Seattle),Washington,United States of America,200810,81000.0,CIHR Doctoral Research Award,Studentship Programs,Biomedical,"Neurosciences, Mental Health and Addiction",In Vitro Evolution; In Vitro Translation; Microinjection; Mrna Trafficking In Neurons; Protein-Rna Interactions; Structure Determination By Nmr; Synaptic Potentiation - Learning And Memory; Tissue Culture,"RNA localization is a fundamental method of regulation of gene expression that results in localized protein synthesis. Neurons transport RNAs to synapses in response to synaptic activity. This is essential for long-term synaptic potentiation, which underlies learning and memory. Several diseases have been associated with RNA transport defects including fragile X mental retardation syndrome, spinocerebellar ataxia, and spinal muscular atrophy. An improved molecular understanding of RNA trafficking is necessary to better understand the underlying causes of these diseases.
RNA localization occurs through the action of RNA binding proteins that recognize specific RNA sequences, but these interactions have been difficult to study in vivo, in part because RNA-binding proteins have promiscuous activity. Ideally, one would like to generate a mutant protein which binds to a mutant but not the wild type RNA signal. Then the matched and mismatched pairs of proteins and RNA would allow us to define whether a specific protein-RNA interaction is essential for RNA localization and synaptic function.
Thus far, engineering an RNA binding protein to recognize a desired RNA sequence has been very difficult. However, we are now able to do just that with a new in vitro protein selection technique developed in the group. I have chosen to study the heterogeneous nuclear ribonucleoprotein (hnRNP) A2 which binds the A2 response element (A2RE), an RNA sequence which was originally identified as the dendritic localization signal for myelin basic protein mRNA. Sequence comparison methods have implicated hnRNP A2 in the localization of other neuronal mRNAs including activity regulated cytoskeleton-associated protein (ARC), which is dendritically localized in hippocampal neurons. The goal of this study is to engineer the first mutant RNA binding protein with altered specificity and to perform the in vivo assays to prove the role of this interaction in RNA localization in neurons.",3 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=174641&lang=en
174648,The Role of MERIT40 in BRCA1-Rap80 complex DNA Repair and Tumor Suppression,Patterson-Fortin  Jeffrey,"Patterson-Fortin, Jeffrey",University of Pennsylvania (Philadelphia),Pennsylvania,United States of America,200810,81000.0,CIHR Doctoral Research Award,Studentship Programs,Biomedical,Cancer Research,Brca1; Brca2; Breast Cancer; Cancer; Dna Repair; Ovarian Cancer; Rap80,"DNA integrity is normally maintained by an elaborate system of DNA repair and genes that repair DNA lesions resulting from DNA replication errors or from DNA damaging agents from the environment.   Conversely, mutations that inactivate DNA repair and checkpoint control genes lead to genomic instability and a predisposition to cancer. The breast cancer early onset 1 gene, BRCA1, is a key regulator of cellular responses to DNA lesions. Inactivating mutations in BRCA1 impair DNA repair and cell cycle checkpoint control responses.  We and others have recently shown that the Rap80 protein is essential for BRCA1 DNA damage site recognition and repair.  Analyzing the BRCA1-Rap80 DNA repair complex, we have identified a new protein that we have named MERIT40 (Mediator of Rap80 Interactions and Targeting 40 kD).  MERIT40 is a Rap80 associated protein that is essential for BRCA1-Rap80 complex integrity and DNA repair functions. 
Further analysis of MERIT40's contribution to the BRCA1-Rap80 complex could lead to significant new insights into BRCA1 dependent DNA repair processes.   To this end, we have begun molecular and organismal approach to further understand the role of MERIT40 in DNA repair and tumor suppression.  First, we are biochemically determining how MERIT40 interacts with the BRCA1-Rap80 complex.  Second, we are investigating familial breast cancers for MERIT40 mutations as well as developing a mouse model of MERIT40 deficiency, asking if MERIT40 is an essential suppressor of cancer.  A comprehensive biochemical and organismal view of MERIT40 in BRCA1 dependent function in DNA repair and checkpoint control may provide a significant new means to positively impact breast cancer incidence and mortality.",3 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=174648&lang=en
174750,Functional correlate of mucosal antibody response to HIV infection in blood.,Snider  Denis P,"Snider, Denis P",McMaster University,Ontario,Canada,200811,100000.0,Catalyst Grant: HIV/AIDS Vaccine Discovery Research (Can HIV Vaccine Initiative),Operating Grants,Biomedical,Infection and Immunity,Cell Culture; Elispot; Flow Cytometry; Hiv; Vaccine,"Most infections with HIV worldwide are sexually transmitted and women are the most frequently infected.  In order to protect against HIV infection and AIDS, vaccines must be effective at blocking entry of the virus.  In sexual transmission, HIV enters through the mucosal surfaces of the body.  These surfaces can respond with a specific type of antibody, the IgA type.  Thus, when developing new HIV vaccines, we must be able to measure the amount and quality of mucosal IgA antibody against HIV.  Studies have shown that women who are able to resist HIV infection have IgA antibodies against HIV, while those that become infected have little or no IgA.  Unfortunately, many such studies have conflicting results or are hampered by the difficulty in sampling and testing for these IgA antibodies, using fluid samples from the mucosal surfaces.  A test in blood would be much more simple, reliable, and useful.  We propose to use the circulating immune cells in blood responsible for IgA antibody production, as a reliable means to measure the amount and quality of mucosal IgA antibody against HIV.  In our proposal, we will be able to determine if IgA antibody was produced, how much response is evident, and how well the IgA antibody can inhibit the virus.  We will look at HIV resistant and HIV infected people to see if any differences exist in mucosal IgA antibodies, obtained from the blood cells.  These studies will provide valuable data and will prove the feasibility of measuring mucosal IgA responses, using blood samples.",1 yr 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=174750&lang=en
174837,"Implications to disease staging, prognosis and natural history in oral cancer of Euclidian analysis of data inherent in examination by Magnetic Resonance Imaging.",Boland  Paul W,"Boland, Paul W",University of Oxford (England),,United Kingdom,200810,27000.0,CIHR Doctoral Research Award,Studentship Programs,Clinical,Cancer Research,Diagnostic Imaging; Magnetic Resonance Imaging; Maxillofacial Surgery; Multivariate Statistics; Neural Network; Oncology; Oral Cancer; Predictive Model; Surgical Management; Survival,"One of the biggest problems with oral cancer is that it metastasizes (spreads) to lymph nodes in the neck very early. We're not very good at using clinical examination and medical imaging to find out which oral cancer patients have cancer spread to lymph nodes in their necks and which do not. This is important because right now surgeons have no choice but to remove the lymph nodes from the neck of almost every patient. If we could better predict which patients have lymph node spread, then the potential exists to prevent unnecessary surgery.
 
We are also not very good at predicting patient survival. Right now we use the TNM staging system which classifies patients based on tumour surface diameter (T), lymph node spread (N) and spread to distant sites (M). However, each patient is unique and prognosis needs to be tailored to the individual.

One way to approach this problem is to examine predictive factors that indirectly tell us which patients are more likely to have involved lymph nodes or a poor prognosis. We are primarily interested in factors derived from information gained through magnetic resonance imaging (MRI). Other researchers have told us that depth of invasion is important to consider. Preliminary work by our group has shown that 3D tumour volume is also important. We also realize that the best way to make use of MRI information is in combination with data from others sources, including patient characteristics, clinical examination and pathology. 

Our work uses information gained from MRI and the records of previous and current oral cancer patients at our institution and other cooperating institutions. All of this information is entered into a comprehensive database. By using techniques for combining multiple factors, we hope to find a method for more accurately predicting lymph node spread and survival for each individual patient. Both surgeon and patient will benefit from improvements in the surgical management of this terrible disease.",1 yr 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=174837&lang=en
174839,Affective modulation of motivated attention in schizophrenia: Examining the interplay between top-down and bottom-up processes,Sun  Jane C,"Sun, Jane C",University of California (Los Angeles),California,United States of America,200810,27000.0,CIHR Doctoral Research Award,Studentship Programs,Clinical,"Neurosciences, Mental Health and Addiction",Attention; Cognition; Electrophysiology; Emotion; Event Related Potential; Late Positive Potential; Motivation; Psychophysiology; Schizophrenia; Source Localization,"Exciting developments in the neurosciences are allowing researchers to delineate the biological bases of emotion which, in turn, provide a foundation for understanding pervasive impairments in emotional functioning in schizophrenia. Patients generally have difficulty recognizing and exhibiting facial emotions, and remembering emotional information. These deficits could reflect difficulties with focusing attention on salient aspects of emotional information, preventing the arousing aspects of emotional information from interfering with processing, or both. Normally, pictures with emotional content capture more attention than neutral images, as reflected by brain wave activity, because emotion is believed to promote survival; an approaching predator evokes fear while palatable food evokes pleasure, and directing attention to such emotional stimuli is likely to be adaptive. Our initial data suggests that schizophrenia patients respond normally to neutral and mildly emotional pictures, but do not show the same increase in attention to highly emotional pictures as healthy individuals. This study will determine if schizophrenia patients initially exhibit but can then overcome this affective deficit. Healthy subjects have been shown to respond differently to emotional stimuli depending on how they direct attention; asking subjects to label a picture as pleasant or unpleasant results in greater brain activation than instructions to identify the number of people in a scene. The extent to which instructions involving active control can assist patients in processing emotional information has yet to be shown and will be explored in this study. Results of this study have the potential to yield information about when impaired emotional functioning in schizophrenia might first manifest in the processing stream, and whether such deficits can be improved with cognitive effort; this may help to guide development of novel treatments for affective disturbances in schizophrenia.",1 yr 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=174839&lang=en
175066,Addressing mental health needs in the face of AIDS: A South African Perspective (working title),Burgess  Rochelle A,"Burgess, Rochelle A",London School of Economics (UK),,United Kingdom,200810,81000.0,CIHR Doctoral Research Award,Studentship Programs,Social / Cultural / Environmental / Population Health,Population and Public Health,Community Development; Evaluatory Research; Hiv/Aids; Marginalized Communities; Mental Health; Programme Desgin/Implementation,"Current research has unequivocally proven that to change outcomes for individuals living with HIV/AIDS, multi-disciplinary approaches are our best hope.  For individuals affected by HIV/AIDS, the stresses of disclosing to family members and adapting to life with a chronic, life threatening disease, mental health status becomes increasingly important to survival. As a result, mental health care has been recognized as one of the integral components of comprehensive HIV care in Canada, with great success. However, for patients in sub- Saharan Africa, home to more than 60% of global AIDS cases, a scarcity of human and financial resources make the incorporation of mental health care into existing care frameworks a near impossibility. As such, addressing burgeoning need in these contexts requires the reconfiguration, support and expansion of existing resources dedicated to improving quality of life for HIV positive patients. Thus, through the use of resources in the form of local health programs and NGOs, which provide access to high risk groups such as women and children with HIV, the screening and treatment of mental illness via simple psychological methods employed by local health providers, could make the incorporation of mental health treatments into HIV/AIDS care a plausible reality. This research will engage in the design, implementation and evaluation of an 'add on' program to address mental health needs in rural South African contexts. Informed by an approach to mental health care which incorporates local culture, knowledge and practices to better manage phenomenon such as stigma and local understandings of mental illness, the program will also incorporate models of prevention to generate resilience against mental health risk where possible.  This type of program will allow for mental health issues to be addressed without increasing strains to developing health systems, while improving the quality of life for AIDS patients in the short term.",3 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=175066&lang=en
175125,"Assessing the Origins and Impacts of Conspiracy Beliefs on HIV Prevention Behavior in the Western Cape, South Africa.",Rubincam  Clara C,"Rubincam, Clara C",London School of Economics (UK),,United Kingdom,200810,81000.0,CIHR Doctoral Research Award,Studentship Programs,Social / Cultural / Environmental / Population Health,Population and Public Health,Adherence; Community; Compliance; Conspiracy; Distrust; Health; Hiv/Aids; In-Depth Interviews; Multivariate Analysis; Narratives,"South Africa has the highest absolute number of people infected with HIV/AIDS in the world.  Although testing and treatment centres are available throughout the country, testing rates remain low, and treatment uptake is inconsistent.  HIV testing is an essential precursor to treatment, and treatment with antiretroviral drugs has been shown to lower the viral load in an individual, thus making them less infectious.  Both testing and consistent treatment form part of a comprehensive HIV prevention campaign.  Although there are various reasons for low rates of participation in testing and treatment programmes, an understudied factor is the effect of conspiracy beliefs.  A recent study (Bogart et al 2008) showed that people who endorsed a genocidal conspiracy belief (e.g.""HIV was created by Whites to kill Blacks"") were less likely to have an HIV test.  Ethnographic research by Steinberg (2007) suggests that conspiracy belief is also an important impediment to seeking treatment with antiretroviral medication.  The political and historical origins of such beliefs are persuasive: generations of an Apartheid government that actively researched biological and chemical weapons that could be used against ANC insurgents, as well as recent 'AIDS denialism' by the former President Mbeki and his colleagues has lent credibility to the notion that HIV/AIDS is man-made, and that health programmes may not be benevolent.  By understanding this phenomenon in more detail, and establishing the effects of conspiracy belief on health seeking behavior, this research will better inform interventions that are attempting to promote HIV prevention.  This study also seeks to develop our understanding of the role of conspiracy theories' influence on responses to HIV/AIDS as an exemplar for understanding this phenomena in infectious diseases more generally.",3 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=175125&lang=en
175128,The role of pannexin1 in regulation of transmission of visual stimuli in the adult mammalian retina,Sorbara  Catherine D,"Sorbara, Catherine D","Harvard Medical School (Boston, Massachusetts)",Massachusetts,United States of America,200810,54000.0,CIHR Doctoral Research Award,Studentship Programs,Biomedical,"Neurosciences, Mental Health and Addiction",Gap Junctions; Hemichannels; Lentivirus; Pannexin; Retina; Transgenic Animal Model; Visual Signaling,"Retinal disease is the leading cause of blindness in adults in North America and is becoming more prevalent in our aging population. Current treatments have limited efficacy while therapeutic improvements involve understanding the complex molecular events of visual signaling. In the retina, gap junctions are established by many cell types and participate in retinal circuitry in a variety of ways. Canonical gap junctions are formed by the oligomerization of 6 connexin protein subunits called a connexon or hemichannel. Two connexons from adjacent cells align to form a gap junction, serving as a conduit for small molecules to pass and providing an electrical syncytium. This network is hypothesized to contribute to degeneration in retinal diseases by mediating the passage of noxious substances from dying rod cells to otherwise healthy cone cells. Recently it was shown that pannexin family of proteins was also expressed in retinal ganglion cells, amacrine and horizontal cells. Pannexin is a newly discovered putative gap junction protein. Pannexin1 (Panx1) hemichannels have gained a great amount of attention due to their capacity to open at physiological concentrations of calcium, unlike connexons. Hemichannels are believed to play an important role in the retina as a negative feedback pathway from horizontal cells to cones. Futhermore, Panx1 has the ability to pass signaling molecules such as ATP. Panx1 has been linked to the release of ATP in the retina following elevated hydrostatic pressure providing a mechanism for neuronal damage and death of ganglion cells in acute glaucoma. Together, these findings suggest a potentially important and indispensable role of pannexins in electrical or metabolic coupling between cells in the retina. Gain- and loss-of-function using lentiviral strategies, and Panx1 retina-specific conditional knock-out mice will allow for the elucidation of the role of Panx1 in the regulation of transmission of visual signals in the mammalian retina.",2 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=175128&lang=en
175200,Impulsivity as a moderator of associations between ovarian hormones and binge eating,Racine  Sarah E,"Racine, Sarah E",Michigan State University (E. Lansing),Michigan,United States of America,200810,81000.0,CIHR Doctoral Research Award,Studentship Programs,Clinical,"Neurosciences, Mental Health and Addiction",Behaviour Genetics Models; Behavioural Neuroendocrinology; Eating Disorders; Menstrual Phase Analysis; Personality,"Eating disorders have the highest death rates of any psychiatric disorders. The pronounced psychiatric and medical morbidity associated with these disorders underscore their public health significance and the need to understand their development. Previous research suggests that changes in ovarian hormones across the menstrual cycle cause changes in binge eating (a core symptom of most eating disorders), and that these mutual changes are genetically mediated. However, all women have menstrual cycle changes in ovarian hormones, but only a small proportion develop binge eating. Thus, it is critically important to understand factors that interact with ovarian hormones to differentially predict the development of binge eating in some women vs. others. One important factor may be impulsivity, as this trait is a strong predictor of binge eating in women. Thus, impulsivity may moderate associations between hormones and binge eating, such that women who are impulsive are more likely to binge eat in the presence of a vulnerable hormonal environment. The proposed study will examine this possibility by investigating whether impulsivity moderates phenotypic and genetic associations between changes in ovarian hormones and changes in binge eating across the menstrual cycle in a large sample of twins. Changes in ovarian hormones are hypothesized to be more closely related to changes in binge eating for women high on impulsivity. A secondary hypothesis is that impulsivity will similarly moderate genetic associations between ovarian hormones and binge eating. This study takes a multidisciplinary approach to studying eating disorders by examining personality risk factors (impulsivity) that may determine for whom biological risk factors (ovarian hormones, genetic influences) are most relevant. Understanding how biological and psychological factors interact to increase risk for eating disorders will help identify women who are most vulnerable to developing these debilitating disorders.",3 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=175200&lang=en
175242,Dissecting the mechanisms of protection by attenuated Nef-deleted HIV vaccine,Jolicoeur  Paul,"Jolicoeur, Paul",Institut de recherches cliniques de Montr&eacute;al,Qu&eacute;bec,Canada,200811,100000.0,Catalyst Grant: HIV/AIDS Vaccine Discovery Research (Can HIV Vaccine Initiative),Operating Grants,Biomedical,Infection and Immunity,Aids; Hiv; Transgenic Mice; Vaccine,"The development of a vaccine against HIV-1 represents the best hope of controlling the worldwide AIDS epidemics.  To date, no vaccine has been shown to be clinically useful.  However, in monkeys, an attenuated SIV (simian immunodeficiency virus) belonging to the same family of viruses and causing a similar disease as HIV-1, has been shown to be a very efficient vaccine against the challenging SIV.  There is a general concensus that this represents the best available and the most potent vaccine against SIV.  It is presumed that a similarly attenuated HIV-1 would also be very efficient as a vaccine.  However, the mechanisms by which this attenuated SIV vaccine works do not seem to be through known immune responses (such as antibodies).  Rather, protection is postulated to be mediated by evolutionary conserved mechanisms, designated innate immunity.  Although such an attenuated SIV/HIV virus is dangerous and would never be used to vaccinate humans, knowing how it works would be very useful to design an HIV vaccine.
The aim of our project is to study the mechanisms of protection by an attenuated HIV and SIV, in order to get insights on how to design a non-dangerous and potent HIV vaccine.  We intend to carry out these experiments in the mouse because the same innate immunity as in monkeys and humans is likely to be effective, if indeed, this represents the mode of protection.  Moreover, mice offer strong genetic tools to dissect this protective effect.  Transgenic mice expressing the attenuated HIV or SIV will be challenged with HIV or SIV, in order to determine whether protection also arise in mice and by which mechanism.",1 yr 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=175242&lang=en
175247,INDEL therapeutics for the treatment of infectious disease.,Reiner  Neil E,"Reiner, Neil E",University of British Columbia,British Columbia,Canada,200810,250000.0,Proof of Principle Program - Phase II,Operating Grants,Biomedical,Infection and Immunity,Drug Development; Infectious Disease; Medicinal Chemistry; Nosocomial Infections; Rational Drug Design,"The INDEL platform was the recipient of a Proof of Principle I grant in 2004, which successfully validated the science and allowed the creation of a University of British Columbia start-up company, INDEL Therapeutics Inc.  The platform technology enables the discovery of new therapeutics for the treatment of infectious diseases. 
INDEL views the continued exchange between scientific advancement and microbial resistance in a revolutionary way. Bioinformatics and molecular modeling have grown in sophistication and predictive power, allowing INDEL to identify and target discreet differences in essential pathogen proteins that have a common counterpart in human cells. These differences between almost identical pathogen and human proteins are called indel-differentiated regions. The similarity observed between these pathogenic proteins and their human counterparts illustrates a shared essential function within the cell, conserved through strong evolutionary pressure.  Pathogenic indel-differentiated targets do not readily permit mutation since they are critical cellular hubs and are absolutely essential for pathogen survival. As a result, when INDEL develops a novel therapeutic, its indel-differentiated target will be less likely to mutate and allow the organism to become resistant, since mutations will mean loss of function and pathogen death.
INDEL has demonstrated its ability to discover small molecule compounds against its pathogenic indel-differentiated targets. Using unique expertise in computer (in silico) rational drug design, we have identified therapeutics that can bind to specific indel-differentiated targets and inhibit their function, while showing no interaction, and thus toxicology concerns with the human counterpart protein. Proceeds from the Proof of Principle II grant will be used to creates small molecule leads against several Indel Platform targets for the treatment of infectious disease.",1 yr 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=175247&lang=en
175250,Development of a Novel Oral Amphotericin B Formulation for the Treatment of Systemic Fungal Infections,Wasan  Kishor M,"Wasan, Kishor M; Bartlett, Karen H; Thornton, Sheila J; Wasan, Ellen K",University of British Columbia,British Columbia,Canada,200810,200000.0,Proof of Principle Program - Phase II,Operating Grants,Biomedical,Infection and Immunity,Amphotericin B; Antifungal Animal Models; Co-Infection With Hiv/Aids; Oral Formulation; Systemic Fungal Infections,"Disseminated fungal infections such as candidiasis, histoplasmosis and aspergillosis are on the rise, particularly in patients with cancer, organ transplant recipients, diabetics and those with HIV/AIDS. In these immuocompromised patients, invasive fungal infections are estimated to account for as many as 30% of deaths. Despite the development of a number of new antifungal agents, amphotericin B (AmpB) formulated as a micelle suspension and administered intravenously remains one of the most effective agents in the treatment of systemic fungal infections. However, AmpB administration using the currently available intravenous formulations is often limited by the development of kidney toxicity, manifested by renal vasoconstriction with a significant decrease in glomerular filtration rate and renal plasma flow and by renal potassium and magnesium wasting. Incorporation of many drugs, including chemotherapeutic and antifungal agents, into drug delivery vehicles may reduce renal toxicity without loss of pharmacological effect. However, the limitations of the current intravenous formulations of AmpB are the safety issues associated with administration (i.e. infection of indwelling catheter, patient chills and shaking due to RBC hemolysis, dose-dependent renal toxicity etc.), feasibility of intravenous administration, drug accessibility and prohibitive drug cost. Our intention is to develop an effective oral formulation of AmpB in order to overcome these limitations.  

Objective: The objective of this project is to assess the efficacy and determine the Amphotericin B tissue distribution of novel oral Amphotericin B formulations in multiple experimental systemic fungal infections including candidiasis, histoplasmosis, aspergillosis and crytococcus.",1 yr 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=175250&lang=en
175253,Evaluation of Nanoparticles for the Treatment of Autoimmune Conditions,Santamaria  Pere,"Santamaria, Pere",University of Calgary,Alberta,Canada,200810,150000.0,Proof of Principle Program - Phase I,Operating Grants,Biomedical,Infection and Immunity,Autoimmune Disease; Autoregulatory T Cells; Major Histocompatibility Complex (Mhc); Mice; Nanoparticles; Peptide; Prevention; Therapy; Type 1 Diabetes,"Autoimmune disorders are debilitating, progressive and, at times, fatal conditions that affect millions of people globally, with 5.7 million in North America alone. There are over sixty identified diseases of this type that can cause either localised or systemic damage through an immune reaction mounted by a body against its own tissues. Type I Diabetes, Rheumatoid Arthritis, Lupus, Irritable Bowl Disease and Multiple Sclerosis are just a few examples of autoimmune disorders. Current therapies offer symptom management; however, none offer a cure for the autoimmune diseases. Additionally, the currently available therapies often have debilitating side effects and do not halt the progression of the disease. There is a need to develop curative therapies for autoimmune disorders.  

Dr. Santamaria has studied a novel mechanisms  approach to the treatment of autoimmune disorders and has confirmed its viability in the NOD murine model of Diabetes. Currently, he is completing demonstration in a second animal model of Multiple Sclerosis. The research to date supports the methodology as a novel and potentially powerful approach to reverse the damaging effects of autoimmune responses. The focus is now shifting to developing the technology into a commercializable therapeutic treatment.",1 yr 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=175253&lang=en
175414,"The effects of low-dose leptin administration in combination with increased caloric intake in premenopausal exercising women with amenorrhea: Impact on energy status, reproductive function and bone turnover",Scheid  Jennifer L,"Scheid, Jennifer L",Pennsylvania State University,Pennsylvania,United States of America,200810,54000.0,CIHR Doctoral Research Award,Studentship Programs,Biomedical,Gender and Health,Amenorrhea; Body Weight; Bone Health; Endocrine Control; Energy Status; Leptin; Menstrual Cyclicity; Metabolic Hormones; Resting Metabolic Rate,"Amenorrhea in physically active women is linked to an energy deficit caused by an energy imbalance between caloric intake and energy expenditure. Leptin has been identified as a peripheral signal of energy status that regulates the hypothalamic centers associated with reproductive function. Premenopausal women with amenorrhea due to an energy deficit have suppressed leptin levels. The proposed project will test the independent and combined effects of leptin administration with increased food intake in exercising women with amenorrhea. This project will evaluate a clinical intervention that could reverse exercise-associated amenorrhea while maintaining body weight i.e., not losing weight. The reversal of amenorrhea will increase previously suppressed estrogen levels, and suppressed estrogen levels have been associated with bone loss and an increased risk of stress fractures. To date no study has administered a combination of recombinant leptin while simultaneously increasing caloric intake to improve the menstrual cycle, energy status, and bone health while maintaining body weight. This project will assist health care professionals in their efforts to improve and optimize reproductive and bone health in premenopausal women with menstrual cycle disturbances caused by an energy deficiency.",2 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=175414&lang=en
175438,Development of a Peptide Imaging Agent for Optical Imaging of Lymphangiogenesis In Vivo,Lachance  Pier-Anne,"Lachance, Pier-Anne",The University of Texas Health Science Center at Houston,Texas,United States of America,200810,81000.0,CIHR Doctoral Research Award,Studentship Programs,Biomedical,Circulatory and Respiratory Health,Cancer; In Vivo Imaging; Integrins; Lymphadema; Lymphangiogenesis; Nuclear Imaging; Optical Imaging; Peptide Synthesis,"The lymphatic system is a major component of the circulation system. The function of the lymphatic system is to keep fluid balance and lipids circulation in the body and to serve as a site for recognition of foreign molecules by the immune cells. The lymphatic system is remodeled in a process called lymphangiogenesis.  Deficiency in the remodeling or lack of remodeling of the lymphatic system influences the normal functions of the body and can cause diseases such as lymphedema, asthma, obesity, arthritis, and cancer metastasis.  

I propose to use fluorescent molecular imaging to understand the process of lymphangiogenesis in a mouse model. I will develop a molecular imaging agent that identifies regions in the body where high levels of lymphangiogenesis occur which could indicate that disease is present.  The molecular imaging agent will provide a new tool that will allow us to better investigate the process of lymphangiogenesis in vivo. Finally if successful, the agent will be tested for safe use into human for use in a clinical setting.",3 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=175438&lang=en
175513,Validation of Tissue and Cytology Microarray Spotter (TCMS) for Simultaneous Multiple Biomarker Detection in Cells,Banerjee  Diponkar,"Banerjee, Diponkar",University of British Columbia,British Columbia,Canada,200810,150000.0,Proof of Principle Program - Phase I,Operating Grants,Biomedical,Cancer Research,Biomarker; Breast Cancer; Cytology; Fluorescence In-Situ Hybridization; Immunohistochemistry; Microarray,"The aim of this application is to validate, for clinical application in a diagnostic laboratory setting, an instrument called a Tissue and Cytology Microarray Spotter (TCMS) suitable for immunohistochemistry (IHC), fluorescence in-situ hybridization (FISH), or both, of tissue sections or cell suspensions in an array format. We will confirm and optimize its performance, establish costs per sample labeled, and determine reproducibility. The validation will be done with commonly used, high volume biomarker tests on breast cancer samples and prenatal samples.",1 yr 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=175513&lang=en
175515,An Enzyme Inhibitor for Treating Type-2 Diabetes,Pinto  Mario,"Pinto, Mario","Simon Fraser University (Burnaby, B.C.)",British Columbia,Canada,200810,150000.0,Proof of Principle Program - Phase I,Operating Grants,Biomedical,"Nutrition, Metabolism and Diabetes",In Vivo Efficacy; Inhibitors; Intestinal Glucosidase Enzymes; Toxicity Profile; Type-2 Diabetes,"Non-insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus (NIDDM), or Type-2 
diabetes, is the major type, representing 90% of all diabetes 
cases. It is a chronic disease, characterized by hyperglycemia 
and results in a high level of morbidity and mortality from 
complications. Patients with this condition are primarily treated 
with oral medications from a number of drug classes which aim 
to reduce blood glucose in either the fasting or postprandial 
(after a meal) states.  The global market for Type-2 diabetes 
was US$19B in 2005, which represents an 11.5% increase from 
2004.1 

We propose to develop a new compound with higher potency 
and specificity than currently available agents for controlling the 
breakdown of starches to glucose after meals.  This compound 
will act by compromising the enzymes in the small intestine that 
perform this function. 

This proof of principle request is to synthesize this new 
compound and to test its efficacy in a rat diabetic model, as well 
as to determine its preliminary toxicity profile. A favorable 
outcome will provide sufficient proof of principle to enable us to 
explore licensing opportunities with larger biotechnology or 
pharmaceutical companies with R&D programs in Type-II 
diabetes.",1 yr 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=175515&lang=en
175517,Clinical validation of low-cost ultrasensitive electronic molecular  diagnostics,Kelley  Shana O,"Kelley, Shana O",University of Toronto,Ontario,Canada,200810,150000.0,Proof of Principle Program - Phase I,Operating Grants,Biomedical,Genetics,Biomarker; Biosensor; Molecular Diagnostics,"New cancer diagnostics are desperately needed to enable early 
cancer diagnosis and advance treatment.  Current diagnostic 
methods available are not sensitive or accurate enough to detect 
cancers before they progress and spread.  The proposed research 
project will develop ultrasensitive and cost-effective cancer 
diagnostics to meet this urgent need.",1 yr 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=175517&lang=en
175572,CIHR Team in Substance Abuse Treatment,Gill  Kathryn J,"Gill, Kathryn J",Research Institute of the McGill University Health Centre,Qu&eacute;bec,Canada,200810,738055.0,Team Grant: Substance Abuse Prevention and Treatment,Operating Grants,Clinical,"Neurosciences, Mental Health and Addiction",Brief Interventions; Knowledge Transfer; Mental Illness; Primary Care; Program Evaluation; Substance Dependence,"The objective of the proposed research is to study the process of implementation of a program of addiction/mental health intervention into primary health care settings. The research sites include three health clinics in Montreal administered by the Centre de Santé et de Services Sociaux (CSSS) de la Montagne. 

The program entitled ""Treating Substance Dependence and Mental Illness: Tools for the Front Line Practitioner"" was designed by the staff of the Addictions Unit at the McGill University Health Centre (MUHC) to facilitate the screening, assessment and treatment of clients with addictions and comorbid mental illness by front line practitioners. Using both qualitative and quantitative methods, the research will determine the conditions that favor the process of knowledge translation from specialty to front line services and will involve an examination of the systemic barriers to knowledge uptake. In addition, the effectiveness of the intervention program as administered in primary care sites will be determined using a pre-post design with monitoring of outcomes in terms of the changes in health care service delivery and outcomes for patients.",5 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=175572&lang=en
175648,Modulation of intestinal barrier function in gluten sensitivity,Verdu  Elena F,"Verdu, Elena F",McMaster University,Ontario,Canada,200810,29527.0,Operating Grant: CAG Gastroenterology/Nutrition,Operating Grants,Biomedical,Infection and Immunity,Gluten Sensitivity; Intestinal Microbiota; Intestinal Permeability; Non Steroidal Antiinflammatory Drugs,"Gastrointestinal symptoms are frequently triggered by abnormal reactions to food. The most well studied food 
intolerances are allergic reactions. However, the precise underlying mechanisms of non-allergic food intolerance are 
unknown in the majority of cases. An exception is classic celiac disease, a permanent intolerance to wheat (gluten) 
that affects 1% of the Canadian population. Classic celiac disease causes malabsorbtion and weight loss, and is 
characterized by destruction of the intestinal surface (mucosal atrophy). However, gluten intolerance can produce a 
broad spectrum of clinical manifestations, of which classic celiac disease is only the best characterized.  I propose to 
investigate how changes in the intestinal barrier induced by administration of common drugs such as pain killers can 
influence the progression to severe forms of wheat intolerance. The insight gained in this proposal will have a broad 
impact on the development of new treatments for gastrointestinal symptoms triggered by food intolerance.",2 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=175648&lang=en
175649,Identification and characterization of Helicobacter pylori CagA-dependent host signaling pathways.,Stein  Markus A,"Stein, Markus A",University of Alberta,Alberta,Canada,200810,30000.0,Operating Grant: CAG Gastroenterology/Nutrition,Operating Grants,Biomedical,Infection and Immunity,Cytotoxin; Helicobacter Pylori; Pathogenesis; Pathogenicity Island; Proteomics; Signal Transduction,"Helicobacter pylori is a human pathogen that is associated with several gastric diseases including peptic ulcer disease and gastric cancer. Helicobacter strains  with increased pathogenicity possess an additional piece of DNA (pathogenicity island) in their chromosome that carries information for the formation of a type IV secretion system and its substrate - the CagA cytotoxin. 
Injection of CagA into the host cell via the secretion system alters the behaviour of gastric epithelial cells. Our hypothesis is that CagA causes alterations of specific cellular signaling pathways. This interference with otherwise tightly controlled cellular functions is a contributing factor for the development of 
pathological phenotypes on the molecular level. 
Therefore, the aim of my laboratory is to better understand the cytotoxic effects of the CagA cytotoxin on host epithelial cells.  
A better understanding of of CagA-mediated host events  is crucial to understand the molecular mechanisms of gastric diseases and will likely allow the identification of novel targets 
for drug development.",2 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=175649&lang=en
175650,Roles of Guidance Molecules in the Development of Brain-Gut  Connections,Ratcliffe  Elyanne M,"Ratcliffe, Elyanne M",McMaster University,Ontario,Canada,200810,45000.0,Operating Grant: CAG Gastroenterology/Nutrition,Operating Grants,Biomedical,"Human Development, Child and Youth Health",Developmental Biology; Gastrointestinal Motility; Guidance Molecules; Interstitial Cells Of Cajal; Transgenic Mice; Vagus Nerve,"Gastrointestinal disorders of motility are a common problem in 
children and adults.  In order to have normal bowel function, the 
gut requires an operational nervous system.  Two types of nerve 
cells contribute to the nervous system of the bowel, one is 
intrinsic to the gut itself, while the other is extrinsic (outside the 
bowel) but sends nerves to it.  The extrinsic nerves provide an 
important 2-way conduit of information between the gut and 
the brain.  Because of this bi-directional flow of information, the 
gut and the brain have profound affects on one another; thus, it 
is important that the extrinsic nerves that connect the brain to 
the bowel be connected properly.  If they are not, then the 
abnormal ¿wiring¿ of the system can be expected to lead to 
abnormal function.  Examples of conditions that might result 
from abnormal wiring include birth defects of the gut, disorders 
of intestinal motility, and functional gastrointestinal disorders.  
Unfortunately, almost nothing is currently known about how 
extrinsic nerves ¿find¿ the gut during fetal life and get to the 
right places within it.  I am, therefore, proposing studies that 
will begin to identify the developmental mechanisms responsible 
for wiring the brain to the bowel by extrinsic nerves.  Learning 
how extrinsic nerves are normally guided to the gut will improve 
the understanding of how gastrointestinal disorders of motility 
develop and hopefully lead to new approaches in treatment.",1 yr 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=175650&lang=en
175651,Prevalence of Asymptomatic Venous Thrombosis in Hospitalized Inflammatory Bowel Disease Patients and Screening Strategies for Their Early Detection,Nguyen  Geoffrey C,"Nguyen, Geoffrey C",Sinai Health System (Toronto),Ontario,Canada,200810,30000.0,Operating Grant: CAG Gastroenterology/Nutrition,Operating Grants,Clinical,Health Services and Policy Research,Cost-Effectiveness; Inflammatory Bowel Disease; Screening; Venous Thrombosis,"Inflammatory bowel disease is a chronically debilitating condition that arises from inflammation of the gut.  It occurs more frequently in Canada than any other nation and results in frequent major abdominal surgery and hospitalization. Patients who are hospitalized for inflammatory bowel disease (IBD)are at high risk of having venous clots, most frequently in their legs.  The presence of such clots increases their risk of death during hospitalization by more than two-fold.  The prevention, early detection and treatment of these clots can be life-saving.  Unfortunately, these leg clots can be already present on admission and remain asymptomatic early on when treatment may be most effective.  The primary goals of our study are to: (1) determine the frequency of asymptomatic leg clots among hospitalized inflammatory disease patients on admission; (2) to assess the potential strategies for detecting these clots while still asymptomatic; (3) to evaluate the most cost-effective way of implementing potential screening strategies for venous clots.  The results of our study have the potential to reduce complications from venous clots and subsequent mortality.",2 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=175651&lang=en
175653,Epithelial Cell Shedding and Intestinal Permeability,Liu  Julia,"Liu, Julia",University of Alberta,Alberta,Canada,200810,30000.0,Operating Grant: CAG Gastroenterology/Nutrition,Operating Grants,Biomedical,"Nutrition, Metabolism and Diabetes",Confocal Endomicroscopy; Crohn'S Disease; Epithelial Cell Shedding; Intestinal Bowel Disease; Permeability,"Changes in the inherent leakiness of the wall of the intestine (i.e., in the intestinal permeability) are thought to play a significant role in the development of inflammatory bowel diseases such as Crohn¿s disease and ulcerative colitis. Intestinal permeability is affected by a number of factors. Research using a new technology¿confocal endomicroscopy or CEM¿suggests that the rate at which cells are lost naturally from the interior surface of the intestine (the epithelium) is increased in inflammatory bowel disease. However, whether this abnormal shedding of epithelial cells causes abnormal permeability of the intestine remains unknown. The goal of our proposal is to determine how epithelial cell shedding affects intestinal permeability under both normal and disease conditions. 

Our first aim is to find a way to use CEM to accurately measure the rate of epithelial cell shedding in healthy rodents. The rate of cell shedding in healthy mice will be controlled using TNF-alpha, a protein that is naturally present in the body. With these calibration data from healthy animals, we will be able to develop a model that can determine various cellular features (including cell shedding) and intestinal permeability under healthy conditions.

Our second aim is to determine the contributions of cellular shedding when intestinal permeability is increased to the levels found in disease states. The permeability will be altered in mice by changing either environmental or genetic factors (i.e., administering aspirin or using a genetically defective strain of mice, respectively). The contribution of cellular shedding to permeability of the small bowel in the disease states and in the healthy states will be determined.

These studies will use new technology to provide crucial new insights into the basic mechanisms of changes in intestinal permeability, and how certain genetic predispositions can lead to inflammatory bowel disease.",2 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=175653&lang=en
175654,Use of colonic stents in malignant colorectal obstruction: A population-based analysis.,Wang  Charlie S,"Wang, Charlie S",University of Toronto,Ontario,Canada,200810,60000.0,CAG/CIHR Fellowship for Research in Gastroenterology/Nutrition,Fellowship Programs,Clinical,"Nutrition, Metabolism and Diabetes",Colorectal Cancer; Obstruction; Stent,"It is estimated that up to 29% of patients with advanced colorectal cancer will present with bowel obstruction. Treatment involves either surgery or insertion of metal stents to resolve the obstruction. Published studies have shown that metal stents are effective in relieving colon cancer obstruction; however, a limitation of current research is that the vast majority of published trials are small, study only a narrow patient population, and only follow patients for a short period of time.

Currently, there is little known on how clinicians are using these stents in real world clinical practice (outside of the controlled setting of a clinical trial), and the outcomes over several years in patients who receive these stents. This is an important question because the results of clinical trials can differ when applied to routine clinical practice; where patients are heterogeneous and unpredictable, follow-up is longer, and unexpected or unknown factors arise.

Using data from linked administrative health databases, our research project will address two aims. The first to describe the demographic, clinical, geographic, and temporal characteristics of colonic stent use for colorectal cancer obstruction in the province of Ontario, Canada. The second is to report the clinical course after colonic stent insertion in these patients, including adverse events. Predictors of adverse events will also be identified. The analysis will provide insight into the current practice of colorectal stent insertion for malignant bowel obstruction in Ontario, Canada.

This research can improve the care of patients with bowel obstruction from colorectal cancer. Determining the patterns of use, and associated short and long-term clinical course in a large population-based cohort will allow clinicians to better advise patients on expected outcomes after stent insertion, and may demonstrate which patients benefit most after colorectal stent insertion.",2 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=175654&lang=en
175658,Optimising the Phenotypic Classification of Paediatric Inflammatory Bowel Disease,Sherlock  Mary,"Sherlock, Mary",Hospital for Sick Children (Toronto),Ontario,Canada,200810,60000.0,CAG/CIHR Fellowship for Research in Gastroenterology/Nutrition,Fellowship Programs,Clinical,"Human Development, Child and Youth Health",Disease Classification; Disease Phenotype; Inflammatory Bowel Disease; Paediatric Gastroenterology,"Inflammatory bowel disease (IBD) refers to a state of chronic or recurring inflammation of the intestine. It affects approximately 0.3% of Canadians and 25% of patients are diagnosed during childhood or adolescence. Although there are 2 main subtypes, Crohn's disease (CD) and ulcerative colitis (UC), IBD represents a spectrum of disorders. This is evident by the extensive variation amongst patients in terms of clinical features at diagnosis, the severity of their disease course, progression of the disease over time and responsiveness to treatment.
As our knowledge of IBD increases, different classification systems have been put forward in an attempt to categorise patients according to their disease manifestations. In addition, there have been huge advances in the field of genetics and over 30 genes have now been identified that are associated with an increased susceptibility to IBD, and CD in particular. Many studies are underway which are attempting to correlate a patients genetic mutation (if present) with their subsequent disease course, using specific disease categories. However, the results of these studies have been disappointing as findings have not been consistently reproduced in similar studies. This may be a result of imprecise disease classification. We know from the medical literature, that the disease course frequently progresses to a more severe state over time. We believe that classification systems should in some way, incorporate the change in disease behaviour over time. With this study, we plan to examine the current classification systems and to consider methods of improving disease classification such that the true results of genetic correlation studies can be determined. By doing this, there is a potential for the results of genetic studies to more accurately predict a patients likely disease course and response to treatment. Ultimately this may enhance the care of children with IBD, by facilitating patient-tailored treatment.",2 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=175658&lang=en
175659,Enteric glial P2X7 receptors in inflammatory bowel disease,Gulbransen  Brian D,"Gulbransen, Brian D",University of Calgary,Alberta,Canada,200810,60000.0,CAG/CIHR Fellowship for Research in Gastroenterology/Nutrition,Fellowship Programs,Biomedical,"Nutrition, Metabolism and Diabetes",Colitis; Enteric; Glia; Guinea Pig; Inflammation; Mouse; Myenteric; Neurodegeneration; P2x7; Purinergic,"Inflammatory bowel disease (IBD) is increasingly prevalent and approximately 10,000 new cases are diagnosed in Canada every year. While the underlying mechanisms causing IBD are unknown, recent advances demonstrate that the enteric nervous system (ENS) plays a key role. In the central nervous system (CNS), glial cells are critical mediators of inflammation. During pathological conditions, astrocytes and microglia release excitatory amino acids, ATP, and proinflammatory cytokines such as interleukin-1&#946; through ionotropic purinergic P2X7 receptors (P2X7Rs), causing proinflammatory responses, neurodegeneration, and the development of chronic and neuropathic pain. Like CNS neurons, enteric neurons are surrounded and far outnumbered by a distinct type of peripheral glial cell called enteric glia. Molecular and morphological similarities between enteric glia and CNS astrocytes suggest they fulfill similar roles but the functional role of enteric glia remains largely unknown, although enteric glia have been implicated in the development of intestinal inflammation. We recently discovered that enteric glia are actively involved in purinergic neurotransmission in the ENS. Enteric glia express P2X7Rs but their role in the development of inflammatory conditions in the ENS is unknown. We propose that enteric glia upregulate P2X7R function during inflammation, leading to excitotoxicity in enteric neurons. We will test this hypothesis using calcium imaging and dye uptake assays to investigate if enteric glial P2X7Rs are more functional in inflamed intestines. Further, we will utilize mice deficient in the P2X7 gene (P2X7-KO) and mice administered inhibitors of P2X7Rs to test if modulation of P2X7Rs prevents inflammation-induced neuronal loss. The proposed experiments will significantly add to our comprehension of cellular mechanisms leading to IBD, leading to the development of targeted pharmaceuticals for IBD and increasing the quality of life for thousands of Canadians.",2 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=175659&lang=en
175660,Investigating the role of NOD receptors in Salmonella enterica  serovar Typhimurium induced colitis,Geddes  Kaoru J,"Geddes, Kaoru J",University of Toronto,Ontario,Canada,200810,120000.0,CAG/CIHR Fellowship for Research in Gastroenterology/Nutrition,Fellowship Programs,Biomedical,Infection and Immunity,Colitis; Immune; Immunology; Infection; Inflammation; Innate; Nod1; Nod2; Receptors; Salmonella,"Innate immune receptors are proteins critical for detecting bacterial invasion and initiating immune responses against microbial pathogens. NOD1 and NOD2 are innate immune receptors that induce inflammatory responses by detecting the presence of a component of bacterial cell walls called peptidoglycan. Mutations in the genes encoding NOD1 and NOD2 result in aberrant immune responses and have been linked to several inflammatory diseases in humans including inflammatory bowel disease (IBD). How NOD receptors contribute to IBD is not clear, however it is likely related to the role of NOD receptors in detecting harmful bacteria and initiating appropriate responses to prevent infection. Thus, understanding the precise role of NOD receptors in controlling inflammation during intestinal infection will help clarify the role of these receptors in IBD. Therefore, we wish to determine the role of NOD receptors in a well-established animal model for a common human pathogen Salmonella enterica serovar Typhimurium. Through this work we wish to further develop our understanding of how NOD receptors contribute to intestinal inflammation during infection and how they contribute to human diseases.",2 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=175660&lang=en
175661,Studies on the effect of feeding anti-CD3 Antibody in the prevention and treatment of colitis,Forster  Katharina,"Forster, Katharina",University of Toronto,Ontario,Canada,200810,120000.0,CAG/CIHR Fellowship for Research in Gastroenterology/Nutrition,Fellowship Programs,Biomedical,Infection and Immunity,Animal Models; Ibd; Musosal Immunology; Musosal Inflammation; Oral Tolerance; Regulatory Tcell; T Cell,"Over 200,000 Canadians suffer from inflammatory bowel diseases (IBD) such as Crohn¿s disease (CD) or ulcerative colitis (UC). To date there are no known treatments to cure the disease.  Although the cause of IBD is unknown, the theory is that IBD has a genetic basis that leads to abnormal interactions between the immune system and environmental agents or triggers. To find a cure we need to understand the basic principles that govern the function of the gut¿s immune system. The immune system of the gut protects against harmful agents while at the same time controls excessive or inappropriate responses against ¿normal¿ bacteria and food related antigens. Indeed, feeding substances leads to ""oral tolerance"", where immune response to that substance is minimized. This fine balance is lost in patients with IBD.  Studies in humans and animals suggest that T cells are involved in both the induction and regulation of inflammatory processes in IBD. T cells distinguish foreign from self via the T cell receptor (TCR). A subset of T cells called regulatory T cells (Treg) are key to preventing self-reactivity as well as preventing excessive T cell responses. We hypothesize that IBD can be treated by activation of regulatory T cells. We will explore a novel way to induce Treg cells in a mouse model of colitis. We will feed mice with an antibody specific for the TCR (anti-CD3 mAb). This treatment was previously shown to be effective in mouse models of other autoimmune disease. We expect to induce oral tolerance and/or down regulate inappropriate immune responses against normal gut bacteria by induction of Treg. If feeding of CD3-MAb suppresses T cell mediated colitis this could open up new strategies for therapy in patients with IBD. Indeed the commercial availability of anti-human CD3-Mab, OKT3 currently in use in preventing transplant rejection in humans allows one to consider evaluating the efficacy of feeding this biological as a new treatment of IBD patients.",2 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=175661&lang=en
175664,The immunomodulatory effects of probiotics in experimental colitis,Dharmani  Poonam,"Dharmani, Poonam",University of Calgary,Alberta,Canada,200810,60000.0,CAG/CIHR Fellowship for Research in Gastroenterology/Nutrition,Fellowship Programs,Biomedical,Infection and Immunity,Colitis; Dextran Sulphate Sodium; Immuno-Modulatory Effect; Innate Defense; Mucin; Pro-Inflmmatory Cytokines; Probiotics; Regulatory Cytokines; Toll-Like Receptors,"The etiology of Ulcerative Colitis (UC) include the loss of 'mucosal homoestasis' that under normal conditions differentiate intestinal pathogens from commensals and escalates an immune response against pathogens but remains tolerant to the commensals. The upstream events in UC pathogenesis are change in the density and composition of the intestinal microbiota, a shift in recognition of these luminal antigens and suppression of mucin secretion. The downstream events involve an aberrant inflammatory milieu. The increasing evidence that the critical initial event of UC pathogenesis is change in the composition of the intestinal microbiota led to a more promising therapeutic approach - 'Recomposition of the commensal microbiota with the use of probiotics'. Probiotics are live microorganisms which when administered in adequate amounts confer a health benefit on the host. VSL#3 is a probiotic mixture of eight bacterial species, clinically shown to be effective in preventing flare-ups of refractory pouchitis and in remission of UC. The lack of sufficient information on mechanism of probiotics action as an immune-modulator undermines their use. The questions that need to be addressed include (1) whether probiotics is better as a protective or as therapeutic agent? (2) Probiotics perform immune modulation by suppressing the inflammatory response or by inducing the tolerogenic responses or by simply altering the pattern of antigen recognition? and (3) Does a live probiotic bacteria is the pre-requisite of the beneficial effect or a 'probiotic mimic' (a DNA motif or a secreted protein) can induce a similar effect? This proposal evaluates and compares the therapeutic and preventive potential of VSL#3 and examines the mechanism whereby VSL#3 synergizes to promote innate host defenses against experimental colitis. The proposal also examines whether the beneficial effect conferred by the mixture of live probiotic bacteria is comparable/superior than that of a probiotic mimic.",2 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=175664&lang=en
175666,Host-to-host transmission of attaching and effacing pathogens,Croxen  Matthew A,"Croxen, Matthew A",University of British Columbia,British Columbia,Canada,200810,90000.0,CAG/CIHR Fellowship for Research in Gastroenterology/Nutrition,Fellowship Programs,Biomedical,Infection and Immunity,A/E Pathogens; Colitis; Gastroenteritis; Transmission,"Enteropathogenic Escherichia coli (EPEC) is a major cause of bacterial-mediated infantile diarrhea and poses a serious health threat to young children in developing countries. In industrialized countries, enterohemorrhagic E. coli (EHEC) causes a more severe diarrhea and can progress to a fatal kidney disease. 

The route of bacterial infections often occurs by the ingestion or inhalation of the bacteria. Once inside the host, the bacteria replicate and seek to exit the host to spread to a new susceptible host. This dissemination of bacteria is called transmission and can occur through various means such as insect bites, fecal shedding or, aerosols created by sneezing or coughing. Both EPEC and EHEC are transmitted through the fecal-oral route, with an infectious dose of EHEC being less than 100 cells. Sources of contamination can range from direct contact with symptomatic or asymptomatic carriers, food, drinking water or petting zoos and farms. To put this into perspective, the 2000 EHEC outbreak in Walkerton, Ontario was caused by contaminated drinking water and resulted in 2300 cases and 7 deaths. This exemplifies the serious public health concern posed by these pathogens.

Little is known about strategies that pathogens use to transmit from host to host. My research aims to identify these strategies and determine how they contribute to the spread of disease. This project will lay the groundwork for the largely understudied area of bacterial transmission. The identification of strategies involved in transmission will provide insights and increase our general understanding of transmission. This may also lead to targets for new therapeutic treatments that may help prevent the spread of disease.",2 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=175666&lang=en
175668,Regulatory Mechanisms of Gut Inflammation: Characterizing the roles of LYN and SHIP in the immunopathology of Salmonella infections and IBD.,Bishop  Jennifer L,"Bishop, Jennifer L",University of British Columbia,British Columbia,Canada,200810,60000.0,CAG/CIHR Fellowship for Research in Gastroenterology/Nutrition,Fellowship Programs,Biomedical,Infection and Immunity,Dendritic Cell; Gut Inflammation; Inflammatory Bowel Disease; Lyn; Macrophage; Mouse; Regulation; Salmonella; Ship,"Inflammation of the gastrointestinal is required for the development of inflammatory bowel disease (IBD), as well as the severe complications of bacterial infections. Non-typhoidal Salmonellosis (NTS) is a bacterial infection of the gut, spread via the fecal-oral route through contaminated food and water. The most severe complication of this disease is watery diarrhea, which can be lethal in underdeveloped nations. In contrast to infectious diseases like NTS, IBD are a more significant cause of gastrointestinal illness in developed nations, such as those in North America. IBD is characterized by relapsing inflammatory ¿flares¿ in the gastrointestinal tract, leading to severe complications such as the development of fibrotic strictures as well as colorectal cancer and adinocarcinoma of the small bowel. IBD is thought to be the result of multiple factors, including host genetics, immune responses against commensal bacteria within the gut, and environmental factors, such as diet. Importantly, inflammation of the gut during Salmonella infections or IBD contributes significantly to the complications of these diseases. However, we currently do not understand the immunology that regulates the inflammatory response in the gut.
	In our research, we hypothesize that regulatory molecules present in immune cells control cell activation and phenotypes within the gastrointestinal tract that contribute to inflammation induced during infections or IBD. Understanding how the inflammatory process is regulated is key to unraveling the mechanisms contributing to these diseases as well as providing therapies to treat them. Drugs that target immune regulators could be used to control inflammation during IBD flares, or treat diarrheal illness during bacterial infection outbreaks. Because IBD and bacterial infections like NTS affect billions of people worldwide each year, providing alternative treatments is essential to increase health and wellness in the global community.",2 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=175668&lang=en
175670,L-arginine metabolism in inflammation and fibrosis in inflammatory bowel disease,Sly  Laura M,"Sly, Laura M",University of British Columbia,British Columbia,Canada,200810,230000.0,CAG/ CCFC/CIHR Rx&amp;D New Investigator Salary Award,Salary Programs,Biomedical,Infection and Immunity,Fibrosis; Inflammation; Inflammatory Bowel Disease; L-Arginine Metabolism; Macrophages,"Canada has the highest rate of inflammatory bowel disease in the world with 1 in 200 Canadians suffering with IBD.  Disease is characterized by unchecked inflammation that leads to a cycle of tissue damage and healing.  The repeated damage and healing process also leads to fibrosis causing stricture formation in patients that frequently requires surgey.  I study a specific type of immune cell called a macrophage.  Macrophages are key players in the inflammatory process.  In fact, they are the largest producer of TNFalpha in the gut and an anti-TNFalpha antibody, Remicaid, has proven to be a very effective treatment for IBD.  Normally when macrophages are finished their job in inflammation, they convert to a healer cell that assists in the resolution of inflammation.  A key switch that happens in macrophages is dictated by how they use the amino acid L-arginine.  L-arginine can be metabolized by two pathways, one that leads to inflammation and one that promotes healing.  I am proposing to manipulate the metabolism of L-arginine in macrophages during IBD to stop the inflammatory process and to stop the fibrosis that can lead to stricture formation.  If we can force L-arginine metabolism down the correct pathway, we may be able to use it to stop the inflammatory process that is the root of IBD.  In addition, we may be able to manipulate this pathway to prevent fibrosis and stricture formation and avoid the need for surgical intervention to correct these serious complications in patients with IBD.",4 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=175670&lang=en
175704,"CIHR Team in transdisciplinary studies in DWI onset, persistence, prevention and treatment.",Brown  Thomas G,"Brown, Thomas G; Nadeau, Louise; Ouimet, Marie Claude",CIUSSS de l'Ouest-de-l'Ile-de-Montr&eacute;al-Douglas Hospital,Qu&eacute;bec,Canada,200810,900895.0,Team Grant: Substance Abuse Prevention and Treatment,Operating Grants,Social / Cultural / Environmental / Population Health,Population and Public Health,Driving While Impaired; Integrative Knowledge Translation; Substance Abuse; Team; Transdisciplinary,"This proposal describes the next steps in a pioneering integrative and transdisciplinary research program, initiated in 2002, to reduce driving while impaired by alcohol and other drugs (DWI). We extend the team's scope and membership, while maintaining the innovation and collaboration that have inspired us to date. We propose an interlocking, progressive DWI research program to pursue five main objectives: 1) clarification of causal factors; 2) development and evaluation of a first-time offender classification system; 3) evaluation of the deterrent effect of policies and programs; 4) study of offenders who fail to engage in remedial programs; 5) KTE. These issues are key to advancing DWI prevention and intervention. By its transdisciplinary logic, this  proposal is consistent with CIHR's ""Blueprint"" to ""catalyze and encourage the convergence of disciplines that underlie the most exciting and important discoveries in health research, and to resolve evermore complex health problems"". By its integrative approach, the team, involving Quebec's licensing authorities and other decision-makers, knowledge brokers, and researchers in traffic safety, addictions, psychology, criminology, behavioural neuroscience, psychiatry, medicine, biology, and epidemiology, fortifies its pursuit of a problem-based, user guided DWI research agenda, its capacity to create new knowledge, and to expedite knowledge translation into reducing the public health burden related to DWI-related crashes in Canada, and of course, immeasurable human loss and suffering.",5 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=175704&lang=en
175707,"Non-Medical Use of Prescription Opioid Analgesics in Canada: Epidemiology, Consequences and Interventions",Fischer  Benedikt,"Fischer, Benedikt; Rehm, Jürgen T","Simon Fraser University (Burnaby, B.C.)",British Columbia,Canada,200810,1049800.0,Team Grant: Substance Abuse Prevention and Treatment,Operating Grants,Social / Cultural / Environmental / Population Health,"Neurosciences, Mental Health and Addiction",Brief Interventions; Dependence; Diversion; General Populations; Health Care Utilization; Health Systems; Morbidity; Mortality; Non-Medical Drug Use; Pain; Policy; Poly-Drug Use; Prescription Opioid Analgesics; Prevention; Public Health; Street Drug Use; Treatment,"Several indicators-including relevant projections based on US data - are suggesting that the non-medical use of prescription opioids (POs), and related harms (e.g., morbidity and mortality) are a rapidly growing phenomenon in Canada. However, key empirical data to systematically analyze and understand the phenomenon, and inform evidence-based interventions (e.g., prevention, treatment and policy) are missing. This NET, consisting of investigators of multiple research disciplines/ pillars and institutions across Canada, proposes a program of inter-linked research projects to inform interventions development in the area of non-medical PO use. These include: Epidemiology of non-medical PO use in general and and street populations; mapping of medical PO availability/ dispensing across Canadian jurisdictions; sub-projects into non-medical PO sourcing routes and poly-drug use among street drug users; monitoring of PO related mortality (i.e., poisoning deaths); feasibility of brief interventions for problematic PO use. A knowledge translation (KT) group consisting of representatives from key governmental, non-governmental and professional stakeholders/ institutions will form the basis for systematic KT of research results into intervention domains.",5 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=175707&lang=en
175799,Creation of a Canadian Assessment of Physical Literacy: Development and Validation,Lloyd  Meghann C,"Lloyd, Meghann C",Children's Hospital of Eastern Ontario Research Institute Inc,Ontario,Canada,200809,74927.0,Operating Grant - PA: Reproductive and Child Heath (start-up grants),Operating Grants,Social / Cultural / Environmental / Population Health,"Human Development, Child and Youth Health",Determinents Of Physical Activity In Children; Obesity Prevention; Physical Activity Promotion; Physical Fitness And Motor Skills; Physical Literacy; Survelliance And Monitoring,"Assessment is the cornerstone of education. There is currently a serious gap in the assessment of ""physical literacy."" Physical Literacy is conceived to be the tools, social/cognitive, behavioural, and fitness related, that children need to possess or develop in order to receive the inherent health benefits of taking part in physical activity for life-long health, enjoyment and success. Although physical education is considered to be an integral part of the education of all children, the quality, quantity, and curricular outcomes of physical education are currently not adequately evaluated and the consequently there is no accountability for the obesity crisis in Canada. The objective of this 1-year grant is to create and validate a comprehensive measure of physical literacy on children ages 10-12 years and will be pilot tested in eastern Ontario for feasibility, reliability and validity. The Canadian Assessment of Physical Literacy (CAPL) will assess physical fitness, physical activity, fundamental movement skills and psycho-social knowledge about activity. Three versions of the CAPL will be created in order to determine the most comprehensive, yet feasible, time conscious, with the optimum amount of financial and staff involvement. During this start up grant we are proposing 3 cycles of testing. During Cycle 1 each version will be tested on 75 children. Based on the results and feedback the modules will be modified. In Cycle 2 each version will be tested on another 75 children to evaluate the effectiveness of the modified modules; further minor modifications will be made and in Cycle 3, each version will be tested on approximately 200 children where normative data and trends will be gathered. In Cycle 3 test-re-test, and inter-rater reliability will also be measured. The information gathered will inform parents, teachers, health professionals and researchers about the current status of childhood physical literacy in Canadian children.",1 yr 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=175799&lang=en
175801,Protecting Neural Precursor Cells from DNA damage,Laposa  Rebecca R,"Laposa, Rebecca R",University of Toronto,Ontario,Canada,200809,100000.0,Operating Grant - PA: Reproductive and Child Heath (start-up grants),Operating Grants,Biomedical,Genetics,Dna Damage; Dna Repair; Neural Precursor Cells; Neural Stem Cells; Oxidative Stress; P53,"Every day, the DNA, or genetic code, of our cells receives over 10,000 hits of damage.  This number climbs even higher when we are exposed to drugs or environmental chemicals, some of which can cause DNA damage.  Many drugs and environmental chemicals have a common mechanism of toxicity; they can lead to an imbalance in the level of free radicals in our cells, a condition caused oxidative stress.  Oxidative stress can cause several types of DNA damage, with deleterious cellular consequences.  Some of the most sensitive and important cells in our brain are neural stem cells.  These cells which can be found in both the embryo and adult are the self-renewing, multipotent cells that generate the main cell types of the nervous system.  Stem cells are important for replacing damaged or dying cells in order to repair the nervous system throughout life.  Stem cells are exquisitely sensitive to oxidative stress.  Oxidative stress can cause damage to numerous cellular macromolecules -- DNA, RNA, protein and lipid -- simultaneously.  It is unclear which of these four types of macromolecular damage is important for the toxicity of drugs and environmental chemicals that cause oxidative stress.  This proposal investigates the particular role of DNA damage in oxidative stress-mediated toxicity in neural stem cells in mice.  This research will help us understand how neural stem cells, which are extremely sensitive and important cells in the brain, can be protected from DNA damage so these cells will stay healthy and repair the brain when needed throughout life.",1 yr 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=175801&lang=en
175805,Does Air Pollution Exposure Affect the Development of Type 1 Diabetes?  Experimental Studies in NOD Mice,Ritz  Stacey A,"Ritz, Stacey A",Laurentian University of Sudbury,Ontario,Canada,200809,83335.0,Operating Grant - PA: Reproductive and Child Heath (start-up grants),Operating Grants,Biomedical,"Human Development, Child and Youth Health",Air Pollution; Autoimmunity; Environmental Health; Type 1 Diabetes,"Type 1 Diabetes (T1D) is a serious disorder of blood sugar regulation resulting from destruction of insulin-producing cells in the pancreas.  In T1D, one's own immune system attacks the insulin-producing cells and destroys them, rendering the individual unable to produce insulin.  Scientists do not know exactly what causes the immune system to attack the body's own cells in this way, but it is clear that both genetic and environmental factors are involved.  There is little we can do to affect the heritable aspects of T1D susceptibility, but identifying environmental factors that trigger the autoimmune responses in genetically vulnerable individuals may be of help in preventing the disease.

In this application, we propose an experiment to investigate whether air pollution could be a factor in promoting the autoimmune responses of T1D.  Air pollution has been shown in other studies to promote the development of allergic responses, and in autoimmune diseases like rheumatoid arthritis.  It is reasonable to hypothesize that it may have the same effect on the development of T1D. Mice that are genetically prone to develop T1D will be exposed to air pollution in the form of diesel engine exhaust particles, and the speed at which they develop diabetes and the severity of their autoimmune responses will be compared to diabetes-prone mice unexposed to pollution.  We hypothesize that diabetes-prone mice exposed to air pollution will develop diabetes faster and have stronger autoimmune responses than mice not exposed.

Given that the current treatments for T1D result in a notably reduced quality of life, we wish to identify factors promoting T1D so that we can reduce exposure to those factors.  If air pollution can trigger T1D, it would provide evidence to support efforts to devise more appropriate air pollution emission guidelines in order to protect human health.",1 yr 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=175805&lang=en
175816,The transcriptional control of caudal neurogenesis: the role of the Cdx homeodomain proteins.,Pilon  Nicolas,"Pilon, Nicolas",Universit&eacute; du Qu&eacute;bec &agrave; Montr&eacute;al,Qu&eacute;bec,Canada,200809,100000.0,Operating Grant - PA: Reproductive and Child Heath (start-up grants),Operating Grants,Biomedical,"Human Development, Child and Youth Health",Cdx Homeodomain Proteins; Conditional Knockdown; Genetically Modified Mouse Models; Neural Crest And Neural Tube Formation; Neural Tube Defects; Neurocristopathies,"During embryonic development, the process of neurulation is the first step toward establishment of the nervous system. It involves specific determinants of anterior (brain) and posterior (spinal cord) fates. In the posterior embryo, the first step of neurulation involves the generation of a sheet of cells called the neural plate. Through different processes, the neural plate is then shaped in a closed neural tube, the spinal cord precursor. From the dorsal neural tube, a specific subpopulation of cells, called the neural crest cells, emigrate to generate the peripheral nervous system. These cells have stem cell properties allowing them to also contribute other specialized cell types such as pigment cells (melanocytes), some hormone-producing cells and some muscle cells of the cardio-vascular system. Problems affecting neural tube closure as well as neural crest cells development are the cause of many birth defects or genetic syndromes, such as spina bifida and aganglionic megacolon. Misregulations of neural crest cells development are also responsible of many cancers from childhood to adulthood such as neuroblastoma, neurofibroma and malignant melanoma. A better understanding of neural tube formation and neural crest cells function at the molecular level is therefore required to allow identification of predisposed individuals as well as facilitating diagnosis and treatment of the related illnesses. Members of the Cdx protein family (Cdx1, Cdx2 and Cdx4) are specific determinants of posterior fates and they are active in the early developing spinal cord, starting well before the formation of a neural tube. They are also active in pre-migratory and early migratory neural crest cells. However, the Cdx function in these cells is still not clear because of a lack of a good experimental model. Using innovative approaches, the purpose of this project is to determine Cdx function in the process of neural tube formation as well as in the specification of neural crest cells.",1 yr 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=175816&lang=en
175896,"Mitigating risk and creating effective treatments: Improving services to children and youth with co-morbidities through discovery, collaboration, innovation, and integration",Beitchman  Joseph H,"Beitchman, Joseph H; Henderson, Jo; McMain, Shelley F; Rush, Brian R; Wolfe, David A",Centre for Addiction and Mental Health (Toronto),Ontario,Canada,200810,5000.0,Emerging Team Grant: Co-morbidity of brain disorders &amp; other health problems-LOI,Operating Grants,Clinical,"Neurosciences, Mental Health and Addiction",Children; Co-Morbidities: Psychiatric & Substance Use Disorders; Developmental Trajectories; Effective Treatments; Innovative Models Of Service Delivery; Knowledge Translation & Exchange; Youth & Families,"This proposed research will identify, develop and evaluate innovative and integrative models of service delivery to address co-occurring disorders within a developmentally-informed, community-collaborative framework. The objectives are to: 1) prepare the groundwork for improved treatment for children, youth and families, 2) increase collaboration amongst disciplines and service sectors, 3) develop strategies to reduce barriers to effective treatment and 4) help establish an integrated network of health services and research. A longitudinal framework will be used to follow the developmental trajectories of distinct groups of children and youth at risk for or currently having co-occurring disorders. This approach will help clarify the sequence of disorder emergence among youth with co-morbid disorders (i.e., psychiatric disorder preceding substance abuse or substance abuse followed by the emergence of psychiatric disorder) and facilitate better understanding of various risk and protective factors for these distinct groups. 
 Importantly, we will also develop validated screening and assessment tools and innovative treatments along a continuum from less intense forms of intervention such as consultative approaches to more intense treatments, including approaches that draw upon the principles of dialectal behaviour therapy. These will be developed in partnership with community-based stakeholders to ensure their relevance, feasibility and utility. We will also examine service provider knowledge, attitudes and practices in relation children and youth with co-occurring disorders and enhance capacity by implementing collaboratively developed knowledge exchange strategies. We will utilize web based approaches to extend our reach for distance learning and by using our well established Telepsychiatry program. Moreover, education and training will be a high priority, with students from across health disciplines and research perspectives involved in all aspects of this project.",1 yr 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=175896&lang=en
175900,"Les jeunes du Québec : santé mentale, dépendance, délinquance et victimisation:   comorbidité et interactions",Chamberland  Claire,"Chamberland, Claire",Universit&eacute; de Montr&eacute;al,Qu&eacute;bec,Canada,200810,5000.0,Emerging Team Grant: Co-morbidity of brain disorders &amp; other health problems-LOI,Operating Grants,Social / Cultural / Environmental / Population Health,"Human Development, Child and Youth Health",Comorbidité Et Interactions; Dissociation-Troubles Sexuels; Délinquance Et Comportements À Risque; Dépression-Anxiété-Stress Post Traumatique; Prévalence; Toxicomanie; Victimisation Et Événements Aversifs; Étude Populationnelle-Québec,"Avoir été victimisé dans la sphère privée ou publique est un facteur commun associé au développement des troubles d'anxiété, de dépression, d'agressivité, de délinquance et d'abus de substances. La prévalence de ces problèmes d'adaptation et les risques de victimisation chez les jeunes sont inconnus. Le présent projet vise à connaître la prévalence, les relations et la commorbidité entre: les problèmes d'adaptation sociale et de santé mentale (dépression-anxiété-agressivité-consommation de substances-conduite délinquante) et la victimisation (privée et publique) des jeunes québécois auprès d'un échantillon représentatif de la population (N=3000), en effectuant une enquête téléphonique d'envergure auprès de jeunes (12-17ans) et de parents d'enfants (2-11ans).À l'aide du Juvenile Victimization Questionnaire, permettant de mesurer la victimisation directe et indirecte, la fréquence, et les caractéristiques de l'agresseur; d'un instrument portant sur l'histoire de victimisation et autres évènements aversifs; du Trauma Symptom Checklist et Trauma Symptom Checklist for Young Children; de mesures de délinquance, de consommation d'alcool et drogues, et de prostitution; et de mesures sociodémographiques, il sera possible de générer des connaissances novatrices sur les liens complexes entre les diverses formes de victimisation juvénile, les facteurs de risque et les impacts différentiels, cumulatifs, interactifs et séquentiels sur la santé mentale des jeunes. La comparaison des données obtenues grâce à cette enquête avec celles d'enquêtes plus fragmentaires sur la victimisation et la santé mentale des jeunes au Québec et au Canada mènera au développement d'un cadre théorique rendant compte des différents processus physiologiques, émotionnels, comportementaux, et sociaux par associés aux problèmes de santé mentale chez les jeunes.",1 yr 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=175900&lang=en
175902,CIHR Emerging Team Grant in Concurrent Mental Health and Addictive Disorders,George  Tony P,"George, Tony P",Centre for Addiction and Mental Health (Toronto),Ontario,Canada,200810,5000.0,Emerging Team Grant: Co-morbidity of brain disorders &amp; other health problems-LOI,Operating Grants,,,Biobehavioural Mechanisms; Concurrent Disorders; Knowledge Translation; Psychosis; Transdisciplinary,"The proposed CIHR Emerging Team in Concurrent Disorders based at CAMH in Toronto would be a hub for research and training in the biobehavioural investigations of mechanisms which explain the co-morbidity of addictions in persons with psychotic disorders such as schizophrenia. Using a multi-disciplinary approach which brings together some of the leading Canadian translational and clinical researchers from mental health and/or addictions backgrounds, we propose to study factors which may lead to the initiation and maintenance of addictive behaviours (e.g. tobacco and cannabis addictions) in co-morbid patients, in comparison to age- and gender-matched persons with either the mental health or addictive disorder alone, and healthy controls. We would also bring together multi-modal technologies for these investigations, including animal models of psychiatric and addictive disorders, clinical descriptive studies, neurocognition, behavioural psychopharmacology and human laboratory studies, neuroimaging (PET and fMRI), molecular genetics and social policy and prevention approaches. An integrated knowledge transation and training components will be built into the proposed Emerging Team. We believe that the proposed Emerging Team will make CAMH one of the leading research and training centres in the world for the study of the biology of concurrent disorders.",1 yr 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=175902&lang=en
175903,"Integrating trauma-informed addictions treatment for women with co-occurring substance use, mental health and violence issues",Greaves  Lorraine J,"Greaves, Lorraine J; Dell, Colleen A; Drabble, Laurie A","Centre of Excellence for Women's Health (Vancouver, BC)",British Columbia,Canada,200810,4880.0,Emerging Team Grant: Co-morbidity of brain disorders &amp; other health problems-LOI,Operating Grants,,,Health Systems Change; Knowledge Translation; Trauma-Informed Intervention; Women'S Mental Health; Women'S Substance Use And Addiction,"As many as 2/3 of women with substance use problems report a concurrent mental health problem-often related to experiences of abuse - yet integrated and comprehensive treatment for girls and women with co-occurring mental health and substance use problems has not been implemented in Canada. This Team will build on data and experiences in the United States with trauma-informed approaches, to develop a multi-sectoral knowledge translation and engagement model for research on the co-occurrence of and systems responses to, trauma, substance use and mental health disorders amongst girls and women. The Team will work to shift clinical, policy and overall healthcare system responses to address the co-occurrence of trauma and violence, mental health, and substance use problems among girls and women, with the goal of improving the effectiveness and responsiveness of current treatments, tailored to the Canadian context.",1 yr 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=175903&lang=en
175904,Optimizing brain health to maximize seniors' participation in everyday life,Greenwood  Carol E,"Greenwood, Carol E; Anderson, Nicole D; Dawson, Deirdre R",Baycrest Centre for Geriatric Care (Toronto),Ontario,Canada,200810,5000.0,Emerging Team Grant: Co-morbidity of brain disorders &amp; other health problems-LOI,Operating Grants,Clinical,Aging,Aging; Brain Health; Co-Morbidity; Intervention; Knowledge Transfer,"Sustaining or enhancing older adults' participation in life situations requires a complex understanding of the contribution of health, environmental, personal and activity-based co-morbidities.  Our Emerging Team assembles a unique, multidisciplinary, group of investigators, each of whom has discipline-specific expertise in brain health. This complement will allow us to address the real world problem of co-morbid conditions associated with the aging brain.  Through Emerging Team participation, our work will evolve from multi- to trans-disciplinary to, 1) examine interactions amongst health components, 2) ensure optimal identification of conditions co-morbid with the aging brain, 3) evolve interventions  which take co-morbidities into account and result in positive gains in participation for an individual, and 4) disseminate knowledge from researcher to user.  Our goal is to create the science  needed to guide, develop, and trial the type of interventions needed for seniors to maximally participate in life.",1 yr 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=175904&lang=en
175907,A focus on environmental triggers and neuronal mechanisms of depressive and other psychiatric co-morbidity in Parkinson's disease: From experimental studies to clinical translation.,Hayley  Shawn P,"Hayley, Shawn P; Anisman, Hymie; Derosa, Maria; Merali, Zulfiquar; Park, David S; Poulter, Michael O; Schlossmacher, Michael G; Stead, John D",Carleton University (Ottawa),Ontario,Canada,200810,0.0,Emerging Team Grant: Co-morbidity of brain disorders &amp; other health problems-LOI,Operating Grants,Biomedical,"Neurosciences, Mental Health and Addiction",Behaviour; Biomarker; Depression; Immunohistochemistry; Neuroinflammatory; Parkinson'S Disease,"Our collaborative research plan will involve investigators with backgrounds in behavioural and molecular neuroscience, environmental toxicology, analytical chemistry, epidemiology and clinical neurology. These researchers will synergize their efforts towards better understanding the mechanisms that give rise to depressive and Parkinsonian co-morbidity, with a particular focus on suspected (e.g. inflammatory cytokines, oxidative species) and yet to be identified factors in the evolution of co-morbid pathology.  This work has a translational component, wherein the identification of biomarkers for co-morbidity should enhance the implementation of early and novel treatment strategies.  As well, better knowledge of the environmental and stressful triggers that contribute to co-morbidity will have important implications for health and environmental policies.",1 yr 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=175907&lang=en
175909,CIHR Emerging Team Grant in shared mechanisms for co-morbid  disorders,Honer  William G,"Honer, William G",University of British Columbia,British Columbia,Canada,200810,5000.0,Emerging Team Grant: Co-morbidity of brain disorders &amp; other health problems-LOI,Operating Grants,Clinical,"Neurosciences, Mental Health and Addiction",Cognition; Depression; Infection; Inflammation; Psychosis; Stroke,"Mechanisms of inflammation may be involved with a host of 
comorbid disorders affecting behaviour. In the aging brain, 
inflammatory mechanisms may interact with diseased blood vessels 
and diminished brain reserve capacity to result in problems of 
learning and memory, and in depression. In younger adults, 
inflammatory mechanisms may be an integral part of the way 
exposure to viral infections can influence thinking, memory and 
mental illnesses such as schizophrenia or bipolar disorder. Better 
understanding of the risk factors for viral infection may also be 
important in limiting the prevalence of comorbid mental illness, 
addiction and infectious disease.",1 yr 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=175909&lang=en
175910,CIHR Emerging team grant: Co-morbidities of Traumatic Brain Injury in Children and Youth,Hutchison  James S,"Hutchison, James S",Hospital for Sick Children (Toronto),Ontario,Canada,200810,4920.0,Emerging Team Grant: Co-morbidity of brain disorders &amp; other health problems-LOI,Operating Grants,Clinical,"Neurosciences, Mental Health and Addiction",Biomarkers; Co-Morbidities; Neuroimaging; Quality Of Life; Traumatic Brain Injury,"Traumatic brain injury (TBI) is the leading cause of acquired disability in children. Co-morbid cognitive and mental health conditions may predispose to the injury, and may be worsened following the injury, but have not been well characterized. A better understanding may provide insight into pathophysiology and new approaches for prevention and treatment. Furthermore, the incidence of co-morbid mental health conditions as children with TBI transition to adulthood is unknown. Objective: To determine the impact of mental health co-morbidites on quality of life (QOL) of children with TBI. Primary outcome: Conners' Adult ADHD Rating Scales (study 1) and the Conners III Parent and Teacher Rating Scales in children (study 2). Study 1: A cross sectional case-control design will be used to examine the incidence of cognitive and mental health co-morbidities in young adults aged 20-25 who experienced a severe TBI between the age 1 month to 17 years from the Hospital for Sick Children. Age, sex and socioeconomic group-matched controls with no TBI (N=50) will also be recruited. All subjects will be interviewed to assess mental health co-morbidities, functional and neuropsychological outcomes and QOL. Regression analysis will be used to determine which co-morbidities are associated with poor QOL. Study 2: Prospective longitudinal case-control study -2 year follow-up. Children with mild to severe TBI (N=100), 5-17 years, admitted to the PICUs of 8 children's hospitals in Canada will be included. Controls will be critically ill children with no brain injury. Co-morbidities will be assesed at baseline (pre-injury) and at follow-up, combined with assessment of functional, neuropsychological and QOL outcomes at 12 and 24 months. Hierarchical Linear Models will be used to determine the association between clinical correlates and long term outcomes. Significance: These novel results will change the way we assess and treat cognitive and mental health co-morbidities in children with TBI.",1 yr 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=175910&lang=en
175912,The psychiatric and somatic comorbidities of epilepsy - the development of prospective multicenter cohorts using observational and administrative data.,Jette  Nathalie,"Jette, Nathalie; Burneo, Jorge G; Patten, Scott B; Pohlmann-Eden, Bernhard; Tellez-Zenteno, Jose F",University of Calgary,Alberta,Canada,200810,5000.0,Emerging Team Grant: Co-morbidity of brain disorders &amp; other health problems-LOI,Operating Grants,,,Administrative Data; Cohort; Epilepsy; Health Related Behaviors And Health Outcome; Health Services; Psychiatric Comorbidities; Surveillance,"Epilepsy is the second most common neurological condition worldwide, second only to headache. One in every 10 person has at least one seizure in their life. Many of these people go on to develop epilepsy, characterized by repeated, unpredictable seizures. Epilepsy affects people of all ages, gender, and socio-economic status. Epilepsy imposes a significant burden on patients, their families, and society and this burden is even greater if those with epilepsy who have other conditions (known as comorbidities).  

Studies show that those with epilepsy are more likely to have other conditions, including psychiatric (e.g. major depression) or medical conditions (e.g. migraine, stroke, diabetes). It is not known whether epilepsy is causing these other comorbidities, or vice versa. One way to answer this question is to develop epilepsy cohorts: epidemiological studies that allow us to record information from a group of new patients with epilepsy over time.  

Our objectives will be to: (1) develop epilepsy cohorts to record comorbidities before and after epilepsy diagnosis; (2) develop a tool which will help health providers determine which person with epilepsy should be referred for a mental health evaluation; (3) test our tool in a large group of those with epilepsy to see if applying it improves their overall health and quality of life.

Developing cohorts is crucial in order to improve the capacity to conduct epilepsy surveillance which is currently non existent in Canada. The availability of epilepsy cohorts to study comorbidities and other outcomes will improve planning, coordination and evaluation of overall health care needs, burden of epilepsy and its comorbidities. It will help us ensure proper resources are in place for those with epilepsy. Finally, developing a rating tool to identify those with epilepsy who should be referred for a mental health evaluation should improve their overall health.",1 yr 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=175912&lang=en
175915,Identifying Phenomic Co-Morbidities of Autism Spectrum Disorders and their Genomic Etiologies,Lewis  Suzanne M,"Lewis, Suzanne M; Boerkoel, Cornelius F; Goldowitz, Daniel; Grigliatti, Thomas A; Holden, Jeanette J; Pavlidis, Paul; Rajcan-Separovic, Evica",University of British Columbia,British Columbia,Canada,200810,5000.0,Emerging Team Grant: Co-morbidity of brain disorders &amp; other health problems-LOI,Operating Grants,Biomedical,"Neurosciences, Mental Health and Addiction",Autism Phenotypes/Phenome; Autism Spectrum Disorders (Asds); Biomarkers/Co-Morbidities; Early Diagnosis And Treatment; Genomic Microarrays/Genomic Disorders; Neuroinformatics/Functional Genomics,"Autism Spectrum Disorders (ASDs) affect ~1/150 children, making them the most common childhood neurodevelopmental disability. The profound variability of ASDs has confounded attempts to define diagnostic criteria and to identify underlying causes or effective treatments. We have come together as an interdisciplinary research team with expertise spanning medical, molecular and cyto- genetics, neuroinformatics and functional genomics. We are undertaking a major study of autism co-morbidities associated with genomic microdeletion/microduplication syndromes and their respective phenomic and functional genomic correlates for applications toward improved diagnosis, therapies and quality of life for individuals and families living with autism. As an emerging team we offer a synergistic research and training environment integrally linked with community partners for information exchange amongst all stakeholders, including families/individuals on the spectrum, service providers and policymakers.",1 yr 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=175915&lang=en
175916,Multi-System Neuroimaging Studies of Co-Morbid Addiction &  Mental Illness,Leyton  Marco,"Leyton, Marco; Gill, Kathryn J",McGill University,Qu&eacute;bec,Canada,200810,4800.0,Emerging Team Grant: Co-morbidity of brain disorders &amp; other health problems-LOI,Operating Grants,Biomedical,"Neurosciences, Mental Health and Addiction",Co-Morbid Mental Illness; Depression; Magnetic Resonance Imaging; Personality Disorders; Positron Emission Tomograph; Substance Dependence,"The primary objective is to create a new research team that 
unites (i) the Department of Psychiatry / Montreal Neurological 
Institute neuroimaging group, and (ii) the MUHC¿s Addictions 
Unit specializing in the treatment of complex, co-morbid mental 
illness and addiction. This new team will develop a novel 
research program focused on combined volumetric, connectivity, 
and multi-tracer PET studies of patients with co-morbid 
substance use and other neuropsychiatric illnesses. In brief, 
disturbances to motor and limbic cortico-striatal-thalamic-
cortical circuits are thought to increase susceptibility to 
developing and expressing a wide range of mood, anxiety, 
impulse-control and substance use disorders. Within these 
pathways, the key neurotransmitters include dopamine (DA), 
glutamate (Glu), gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA), endogenous 
opioids and serotonin (5-HT). Different combinations of 
perturbations might predispose individuals to distinct clusters of 
co-morbid conditions. By exploiting the development of the new 
imaging methods and evaluating patients both before and after 
treatment, we expect to obtain an unprecedented 
characterization of addiction and its diverse co-morbidities; i.e., 
a detailed multi-system mapping of the relevant neurochemistry 
and neurocircuitry in health, disease and recovery.",1 yr 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=175916&lang=en
175920,The Epidemiology and Impact of Comorbidity on Multiple Sclerosis in Canada (ECoMS),Marrie  Ruth Ann,"Marrie, Ruth Ann; Fisk, John D; Tremlett, Helen L; Warren, Sharon A",University of Manitoba,Manitoba,Canada,200810,5000.0,Emerging Team Grant: Co-morbidity of brain disorders &amp; other health problems-LOI,Operating Grants,Clinical,"Neurosciences, Mental Health and Addiction",Administrative Data; Comorbidity; Epidemiology; Multiple Sclerosis; Quality Of Life; Treatment,"This Team Grant in Comorbidity and Multiple Sclerosis (MS) represents a joint initiative of four academic centres in British Columbia, Alberta, Manitoba and Nova Scotia and will create a multi-disciplinary team with complementary expertise. The research program has three objectives. First, we will develop methods for using health claims data to identify and monitor co-existing health conditions (comorbidities) among persons with MS and in the general population. Second, we will identify the type and frequency of comorbidities among persons with MS as compared to the general population, determining how this varies according to age, gender, region and socioeconomic status. Finally, we will assess the impact of comorbidity on MS in two ways. By focusing on health-related quality of life we will gain a broad perspective on how comorbidity influences health. By focusing on use of disease-specific treatments for MS we will gain an understanding of how comorbidity influences treatment decisions and access, as well as treatment tolerability and adherence. We will partner with decision makers and the Multiple Sclerosis Society of Canada to ensure that our findings are disseminated. Anticipated benefits from our population-based research program include individualized disease management, novel insights into the pathophysiology of MS, and ultimately improved health care in MS.",1 yr 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=175920&lang=en
175921,A multimodal approach to understanding and addressing the co-morbidity of anxiety disorders and substance use disorders: Development of an integrated treatment strategy in adults and adolescents.,McCabe  Randi E,"McCabe, Randi E; Cairney, John",McMaster University,Ontario,Canada,200810,5000.0,Emerging Team Grant: Co-morbidity of brain disorders &amp; other health problems-LOI,Operating Grants,Clinical,"Neurosciences, Mental Health and Addiction",Anxiety Disorders; Cognitive Behavioural Therapy; Comorbidity; Epidemiology; Substance Use Disorders; Treatment Development,"Anxiety disorders (ADs) are a debilitating form of mental illness associated with extreme distress, impaired functioning, and diminished quality of life. ADs and substance use disorders (SUDs) frequently occur together in both adults and youth.  In most cases, the AD plays a role in the onset of the SUD and treatment outcomes are far worse for individuals with both disorders. In clinical practice, a major obstacle to effective care is that treatment for ADs and SUDs is provided by separate mental health and addictions systems. Objectives: This program of research brings together a research team with a broad range of expertise to develop, evaluate, and share a psychological treatment designed to target the symptoms of both ADs and SUDs together and increase our understanding of the magnitude and scope of co-occurring ADs and SUDs within Canada. Method: Population health survey data and experimental laboratory techniques will be used to identify factors that play a role in AD-SUD co-occurrence and guide treatment development. The treatment will be written in manual form and evaluated in a sample of adolescents and adults with co-occurring ADs and SUDs.  Clinical Relevance: This research will further our understanding of the risk factors associated with co-occurring ADs and SUDs and identify barriers to treatment access and utilization within the Canadian healthcare system. The treatment model developed from this research can be used in both mental health and addictions settings, improving care for adults and adolescents struggling with co-occurring ADs and SUDs. Ongoing collaboration with key community partners throughout the research program allows for direct feedback and discussion of how findings may have an impact on current models of care. Finally, this research program will provide future clinicians and researchers with a unique training model for the development of expertise in AD-SUD co-occurrence.",1 yr 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=175921&lang=en
175922,Patient-centered care of older adults with depression and comorbid chronic physical illnesses,Mccusker  Jane,"Mccusker, Jane",McGill University,Qu&eacute;bec,Canada,200810,5000.0,Emerging Team Grant: Co-morbidity of brain disorders &amp; other health problems-LOI,Operating Grants,Social / Cultural / Environmental / Population Health,Aging,Aging; Care Management; Comorbidity; Depression; Health Services; Research,"This CIHR interdisciplinary team aims to develop systematic, patient-centered approaches to improve the detection and management of older adults with depression comorbid with one or more chronic physical illnesses. The current care of these patients in different care settings (primary care, specialized medical care) will first be described. Interventions will then be developed and evaluated for different care settings that attempt to integrate and support the self-management of the depression with that of the chronic physical illness, and that take account of patient goals and preferences. Quantitative and qualitative research methods will be used. An integrated knowledge translation component will involve partnerships with practice communities, decision-makers, and community members. Training opportunities will be provided for residents, fellows, and graduate students in psychology, psychiatry, family medicine, social work, epidemiology, biostatistics and other disciplines.",1 yr 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=175922&lang=en
175923,The CIHR Team on the Development of Appetite Regulation and Obesity,Meaney  Michael J,"Meaney, Michael J",Centre for Addiction and Mental Health Foundation,Ontario,Canada,200810,5000.0,Emerging Team Grant: Co-morbidity of brain disorders &amp; other health problems-LOI,Operating Grants,Biomedical,"Neurosciences, Mental Health and Addiction",Affect Regulation; Appetite; Attention; Dopamine; Feeding Behaviour,"Children with Attention Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder (ADHD) are more likely to be obese.  We suggest that there is actually functional link between these conditions.  Specifically, we propose that the cognitive/emotional features of ADHD lead to impulsive eating in response to negative emotional states, which then leads to modifications of neural circuits that mediate feelings of pleasure and well being, leading to the development of feeding behaviours and preferences for high fat, sweet foods that favour weight gain and ultimately obesity.  Our team will examine the development of feeding behaviour in children as a function of individual differences in cognitive - emotional function.  These studies would provide a completely novel developmental pathway to obesity and metabolic illness.",1 yr 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=175923&lang=en
175927,Metabolic effects of atypical antipsychotics in the pediatric population (MAAPP),Panagiotopoulos  Constadina,"Panagiotopoulos, Constadina; Weiss, Margaret D",University of British Columbia,British Columbia,Canada,200810,5000.0,Emerging Team Grant: Co-morbidity of brain disorders &amp; other health problems-LOI,Operating Grants,Clinical,"Neurosciences, Mental Health and Addiction",Biological Determinants; Child And Adolescent Mental Health; Health Care Delivery; Metabolic Dysregulation; Socio-Behavioural Determinants,"MAAPP is a new team whose goal is to undertake research focused on the prevention, diagnosis, and treatment of side-effects related to the use of medications called atypical antipsychotics (AAPs) in children and youth with mental health conditions. In adults, AAPs can cause rapid weight gain and changes to cholesterol levels and blood sugar levels, putting these adults at risk for heart disease, diabetes and other chronic conditions. The impact of these medications on children and youth with mental health conditions is not yet known. Our Team will establish a collaboration of clinicians, scientists and community stakeholders; develop a productive research and training program; and build capacity for child and youth mental health research. Our objectives are to (1) understand which youth in British Columbia with mental health conditions are being treated with AAPs; (2) study the reasons for co-occurring side-effects caused by different AAPs; and (3) develop strategies and guidelines to reduce the burden of side-effects and optimize health outcomes in youth. Our vision is to develop effective strategies that optimize mental health outcomes and minimize AAP-associated adverse effects in these children and youth.",1 yr 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=175927&lang=en
175929,Neuropathic pain in HIV/AIDS: interface between clinical and molecular aspects,Power  Christopher,"Power, Christopher",University of Alberta,Alberta,Canada,200810,0.0,Emerging Team Grant: Co-morbidity of brain disorders &amp; other health problems-LOI,Operating Grants,,,Addiction; Animal Models; Cation Channels; Hiv/Aids; Neuropathic Pain,"Neuropathic pain (NP) is the principal neuropsychiatric disorder occurring during HIV infection caused by lesion(s) in both the peripheral and central nervous systems. Although HIV-associated NP is recognized globally, it is a chronic disorder often associated with advanced HIV infection and/or the use of several neurotoxic antiretroviral drugs. Our group's studies of a population-based prospective cohort of over 1600 HIV/AIDS patients indicate that greater than 25% exhibit NP due to multiple underlying causes despite being in active care. In the present proposal, our working hypothesis is that the development of NP occurs due to a unique interplay between environmental and host factors driven by HIV infection of the nervous system. Using an interdisciplinary approach involving epidemiological, clinical, cellular and molecular tools, we will delineate the molecular, cellular and viral determinants of NP in HIV/AIDS patients with the long term goal of identifying biomarkers and therapeutic interventions for NP.",1 yr 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=175929&lang=en
175930,"Équipe des IRSC sur la comorbidité, la santé mentale et le vieillissement.",Preville  Michel,"Preville, Michel","Charles LeMoyne Hospital (Greenfield Park, Qu&eacute;bec)",Qu&eacute;bec,Canada,200810,5000.0,Emerging Team Grant: Co-morbidity of brain disorders &amp; other health problems-LOI,Operating Grants,,,Comorbidité; Personnes Âgées; Psychotropes; Recherche En Santé Des Populations; Recherche Sur Les Services De Santé; Santé Mentale; Santé Physique; Suicide; Utilisation Des Services De Santé.,"La comorbidité physique et psychiatrique est fréquente dans la population âgée et a un impact individuel et social important. Cependant, les mécanismes d'action des facteurs biologiques, psychologiques et sociaux reliés aux conséquences de cette comorbidité sont encore peu documentés. Par ailleurs, à cause du vieillissement de la population et du fardeau que représenteront dans le futur les services requis par cette population sur les finances publiques, la connaissance de l'interaction entre ces facteurs est essentielle pour mieux comprendre le phénomène et répondre de façon adéquate aux besoins spécifiques de cette population. Notre programme de recherche aborde directement plusieurs domaines prioritaires des IRSC. Il touche les thèmes « Vieillir en santé » et « Troubles cognitifs et vieillissement » en s'intéressant aux épisodes de détresse psychologique et à la comorbidité chez les personnes âgées. Il touche également le thème « Politiques et services de santé » en s'intéressant à l'accessibilité et à la qualité des services de santé rendus à cette population. 

À travers ce programme de recherche, les scientifiques impliqués dans cette demande poursuivent trois objectifs majeurs : (1) la mise en commun d'expertises complémentaires pour étudier dans une approche systémique la comorbidité entre les problèmes de santé physique et psychiatrique; (2) la production de connaissances de pointe axées sur l'aide à la décision et la résolution de problèmes cliniques touchant cette comorbidité chez les personnes âgées; (3) la formation des étudiants médecins et non-médecins et le démarrage de nouveaux chercheurs talentueux dans un secteur de la recherche en santé où les besoins sont grandissants et les effectifs réduits.",1 yr 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=175930&lang=en
175931,Équipe de recherche sur le développement d'approches novatrices de prévention du VIH et du VHC chez les usagers de cocaïne souffrant de problèmes de santé mentale,Roy  Elise,"Roy, Elise; Bruneau, Julie",Universit&eacute; de Sherbrooke,Qu&eacute;bec,Canada,200810,5000.0,Emerging Team Grant: Co-morbidity of brain disorders &amp; other health problems-LOI,Operating Grants,Social / Cultural / Environmental / Population Health,Population and Public Health,Cocaïne; Entretien Motivationnel; Intervention Brève; Prévention; Vih / Vhc,"Malgré certaines améliorations observées depuis quelques années, les épidémies du VIH et de l'infection due au virus de l'hépatite C (VHC) liées à la consommation de drogues sont toujours très actives au Canada. L'omniprésence de la cocaïne sur le marché de la drogue canadien serait en cause. En effet, plusieurs études montrent que l'usage abusif ou dépendant de cocaïne est associé à des risques accrus de pratiques à haut risque d'infection par le VIH et le VHC. À cette problématique, s'ajoute celle de la prévalence élevée de maladie mentale chez les usagers de cocaïne ce qui peut compromettre leur capacité à avoir des comportements sécuritaires. Malheureusement à l'heure actuelle, peu d'interventions individuelles démontrées efficaces pour prévenir le VIH et le VHC chez les personnes souffrant de troubles concomitants de toxicomanie et santé mentale sont disponibles et il n'existe aucune intervention spécifique aux cocaïnomanes. Notre équipe a pour but de contribuer à la prévention de la transmission du VIH et du VHC chez les usagers de cocaïne fumant et/ou injectant la drogue, caractérisés par des troubles concomitants de santé mentale, atteints ou non du VIH et/ou du VHC. Nos travaux aboutiront ultimement au développement d'un modèle d'intervention brève, novateur et éprouvé, ciblant les comportements de consommation avec le meilleur potentiel de réduire les risques de transmission du VIH et du VHC soit : la cessation de l'injection, les pratiques sécuritaires d'injection et la réduction ou l'arrêt de la consommation de drogues ou d'alcool. Réunissant des chercheurs de l'Université de Sherbrooke et de l'Université de Montréal appartenant également à des milieux cliniques diversifiés, et des partenaires des milieux communautaires et institutionnels, notre équipe sera en mesure d'assurer un environnement de recherche et de formation de haut niveau et de participer au développement de la relève dans ce domaine de recherche.",1 yr 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=175931&lang=en
175932,Mental Health Outcomes of Traumatic Physical Injury and Burns: A Population-Based Study,Sareen  Jitender,"Sareen, Jitender; Asmundson, Gordon J; Logsetty, Sarvesh",University of Manitoba,Manitoba,Canada,200810,5000.0,Emerging Team Grant: Co-morbidity of brain disorders &amp; other health problems-LOI,Operating Grants,Clinical,"Neurosciences, Mental Health and Addiction",Administrative Data; Anxiety; Burns; Depression; Epidemiology; Mental Health Service Use; Posttraumatic Stress Disorder; Qualitative Methods; Risk Factors; Substance Use; Trauma,"Severe physical injury and burns are enormous public health problems in Canada. To date, little information is available at a population-based level on the impact of these serious injuries on the mental health of injured people. This multi-disciplinary team aims to develop a cohort of injured people such that we can understand the risk factors for development of mental health problems and the mental health treatment needs of injured subjects. To the best of our knowledge, this will be a unique team in Canada and the world in advancing the understanding of mental health consequences of physically injured individuals.",1 yr 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=175932&lang=en
175934,"The Ontario Communities Project: Using a mobile community research laboratory to improve understanding, treatment and prevention of addiction and mental illness co-morbidities at the individual and community level",Wells  Samantha L,"Wells, Samantha L; Cairney, John; Graham, Kathryn (Kate) M; Kates, Nick; Rehm, Jürgen T",Centre for Addiction and Mental Health (Toronto),Ontario,Canada,200810,5000.0,Emerging Team Grant: Co-morbidity of brain disorders &amp; other health problems-LOI,Operating Grants,,,Community-Level Indicators; Data Linkage; Mental Health And Addiction Co-Morbidities; Mobile Community Research Laboratory; Multi-Level Associations,"The CIHR Community Studies in Co-morbidities Team will bring together community partners and investigators from many disciplines to assess and monitor addiction and mental illness co-morbidities within communities using a coordinated innovative approach. Specifically, studies of individual and community level factors associated with comorbidities will be conducted using a mobile community research laboratory. The main aims of the proposed NET are to: 1) assess addiction and mental illness co-morbidities in high risk communities (e.g., high level of poverty or social disorganization) as well as communities that are representative of the population generally; 2) assess linkages between community social indicator data and co-morbidities, with the use of multi-level analytic techniques; 3) assess the extent that community resources can be enhanced to prevent and treat addiction and mental illness co-morbidities; and 4) develop in the long term a community social, addiction and mental disorder monitoring system in these communities. To address these aims, the primary objectives of the NET are to: 1) develop and coordinate research on co-morbidities in 25-30 communities using the mobile lab; 2) develop, maintain and expand a social, addiction and mental disorder monitoring surveillance system in these communities; and 3) partner with primary care settings, local health units, First Nations band councils, community agencies and other key players at the local level to develop research, prevention, treatment and knowledge transfer to address co-morbidities. This advanced data collection combined with robust community partnerships will lead to a better understanding of causes and mechanisms of co-morbidity (in terms of both individual and community risk factors), increased sharing of findings among relevant disciplines, and strategies for overcoming barriers to effective treatment for those with co-morbid conditions.",1 yr 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=175934&lang=en
175935,Relation of adolescent cannabinoid exposure with the co-morbidity of drug addiction and mood disorder,Zhang  Xia,"Zhang, Xia; Bouchard, Jean-Francois; Gobbi, Gabriella; Gorzalka, Boris B",University of Ottawa,Ontario,Canada,200810,5000.0,Emerging Team Grant: Co-morbidity of brain disorders &amp; other health problems-LOI,Operating Grants,,,5-Ht; Adolescent; Adult; Behavioral Sciences; Cannabinoids; Cannabis; Cell Culture; Depression; Dopamine; Dorsal Raphe Nucleus; Drug Addiction; Electrophysiology; Marijuana; Molecular Biology; Mood Disorder; Neuroanatomy; Rat; Serotonin; Stress; Synaptogenesis; Ventral Tegmental Area; Youth,"While Canadian teenagers are among the highest consumers of marijuana in the world, cannabis consumed at a young age is associated with a higher risk of drug addiction, schizophrenia, depression and anxiety. However, how adolescent cannabis exposure leads to the co-occurring mental illness of drug addiction and depression remains largely unknown. To resolve this problem, we propose to establish the first Canadian Cannabis Research Team consisting of the main experts on cannabis neurobiology in Canada. This team not only has 4 professors in 4 universities (University of Ottawa, McGill University, University of British Columbia and University of Montreal) with different expertise in preclinical neuroscience research but also has a unique expertise in translational neuroscience by putting preclinical scientists, psychiatrist, a psychologist and pharmacist together, thereby maximizing the likelihood of collecting the cutting-age research evidence being put into practice. Specifically, we will explore the critical involvement of the ventral tegmental area and dorsal raphe nucleus (two brain regions implicated to play a role in drug addiction and depression) in the developmental mechanism of the co-occurring mental illness of drug addiction and depression in rodents after an adolescent exposure of cannabinoids (chemical compounds found in cannabis or marijuana).",1 yr 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=175935&lang=en
175936,Équipe des IRSC sur la schizophrénie et l'abus de cannabis,Stip  Emmanuel,"Stip, Emmanuel",Centre de recherche Institut universitaire en sant&eacute; mentale de Montr&eacute;al,Qu&eacute;bec,Canada,200810,5000.0,Emerging Team Grant: Co-morbidity of brain disorders &amp; other health problems-LOI,Operating Grants,Clinical,"Neurosciences, Mental Health and Addiction",Cannabis; Immunologie; Récompense; Schizophrenie; Sommeil; Stimulation Magnétique Trans-Crânienne,"La consommation de cannabis a un impact négatif sur le développement de la schizophrénie, l'émergence des premiers symptômes psychotiques et l'évolution de la pathologie. Les effets cognitifs, neurologiques, immunologiques et médicaux du cannabis dans la schizophrénie demeurent cependant peu connus. Les raisons qui incitent les patients à consommer sont mal comprises. Enfin, le traitement de l'abus de cannabis dans la schizophrénie demeure sous-optimal. Afin de pallier à ces manques, notre programme de recherche va consister à: (i) effectuer une évaluation exhaustive des patients souffrant de schizophrénie et d'un abus de cannabis concomitant; (ii) étudier les mécanismes biologiques pouvant expliquer la forte propension de schizophrènes à abuser du cannabis; et (iii) explorer l'effet de la stimulation magnétique trans-crânienne comme traitement des cravings (désirs ardents) pour le cannabis chez les patients schizophrènes.",1 yr 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=175936&lang=en
175965,"Comprehension of cancer risk information on the Internet: Role of graphical, numerical, and text formats by older adults",Arocha  Jose F,"Arocha, Jose F; Donelle, Lorie F; Hoffman-Goetz, Laurie",University of Waterloo (Ontario),Ontario,Canada,200809,60000.0,Operating Grant - Priority Announcement: Aging (Bridge Funding),Operating Grants,Social / Cultural / Environmental / Population Health,Population and Public Health,Comprehension; Health Literacy Assessment; Internet-Based Health Information; Numeracy; Older Adults; Verbal Protocols,"The Internet is increasingly used as a source of health information, with older adults representing the fastest-growing user group. Individuals search the Internet for information they use to support their decisions regarding prevention and treatment options. Unfortunately, many people do not have the literacy skills required for understanding health information. Numeracy--the ability to interpret and use numbers--is a significant aspect of health literacy and includes possessing and using quantitative knowledge and risk information required to manage one's health. However, many individuals have poor comprehension of quantitative information. To investigate older adults' health numeracy and risk comprehension of cancer information on the Internet, we will analyze cancer risk information directed to consumers, patients, and the general public. In particular, we will investigate older adults' comprehension of this Web-based information. In our studies, we will focus on colorectal cancer information.

We propose the following three specific research objectives: 

(1) To investigate older adults' health numeracy comprehension of colorectal cancer risk information on the Internet; (2) To determine how presentation of numerical colorectal cancer risk information (text versus graphical displays) influences older adults' health numeracy and comprehension of such information; (3) To characterize the cognitive processes underlying comprehension of cancer risk information by older adults presented in various formats (text or graphics). 

Our research has implications for the design of risk information involving numbers and graphics by determining the factors that affect comprehension of cancer risk information and the knowledge and reasoning processes underlying decision making under risk.",1 yr 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=175965&lang=en
175977,Regulation of the BACE1 gene expression in the Alzheimer's Disease pathogenesis,Song  Weihong,"Song, Weihong",University of British Columbia,British Columbia,Canada,200809,100000.0,Operating Grant - Priority Announcement: Aging (Bridge Funding),Operating Grants,Biomedical,"Neurosciences, Mental Health and Addiction",Ad Pathogenesis; Alzheimer'S Disease; Amyloid Precursor Protein; Bace1; Gel Shifting Assay; Gene Cloning,"Deposition of amyloid beta protein (Abeta) in the brain is a central pathological feature of Alzheimer's disease (AD). Proteolytic processing of beta-amyloid precursor protein (APP) at the beta site by the Beta site APP Cleaving Enzyme 1 (BACE1), the beta-secretase in vivo, is essential to generate Abeta. BACE1 gene expression is tightly regulated and it shows tissue specificity with its enzymatic activity mainly in central nervous system. Increased beta-secretase activity was reported in the cortex of AD patients and abnormal BACE1 gene regulation links vascular factors to AD. We propose to continue studying the molecular mechanisms of BACE1 gene regulation and its role in AD. Our working hypothesis is that transcriptional dysregulation of the BACE1 gene plays an important role in AD pathogenesis. This proposal seeks to further examine transcriptional regulation of the BACE1 gene and the mechanism underlying the 5'UTR regulating BACE1 translation initiation, as well as their role in AD pathogenesis.",1 yr 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=175977&lang=en
176001,Roles of PTX3 in systemic inflammation-induced neurodegeneration,Lu  Wei-Yang,"Lu, Wei-Yang","Sunnybrook Research Institute (Toronto, Ontario)",Ontario,Canada,200809,100000.0,Operating Grant - Priority Announcement: Aging (Bridge Funding),Operating Grants,Biomedical,Aging,Brain Aging; Electrophysiology; Immunohistology; Neurodegeneration; Synapse Loss; Systemic Inflammation,"Clinical studies reveal that infection-induced systemic inflammation is a risk factor for the future development of Alzheimer's disease.  Experiments show that systemic inflammation, via several pathways, can send signals to the brain and activate the central immune system, hence exacerbating aging-related neurodegeneration.  However, the mechanism by which systemic inflammation induces central neurodegeneration is largely unclear.  In response to inflammatory signals, the prototypic long pentraxin-3 (PTX3) is expressed in various tissues including the brain.  PTX3 binds to the complement fragment C1q, activating complement cascades and triggering protease-mediated cell lysis of pathogens and injured cells.  Interestingly, a recent study demonstrates that activated complement-cascades, possibly by proteolysis, eliminates unwanted synapses during brain development, but promotes synapse loss in early stages of neurodegeneration.  In addition, pentraxins may affect the activity of glycogen synthase kinase (GSK3) a metabolic regulator critically associated with synaptic plasticity and neurodegeneration.  This study intends to investigate the cellular and molecular mechanisms by which systemic inflammation induces neurodegeneration using mouse models of lung infection.  Specifically, we will examine the role of PTX3 in inflammation-induced synaptic injury in young adult and old mice.",1 yr 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=176001&lang=en
176009,Role of beta-amyloid peptides in regulating the function/survival of central cholinergic neurons and its implications in Alzheimer's disease pathology,Kar  Satyabrata,"Kar, Satyabrata",University of Alberta,Alberta,Canada,200809,93945.0,Operating Grant - Priority Announcement: Aging (Bridge Funding),Operating Grants,Biomedical,Aging,Alzheimer'S Disease; Beta Amyloid Peptides; Cholinergic Neurons; Immunocytochemistry; Neurodegeneration; Neuroprotection,"Alzheimer's disease (AD), the most common type of senile dementia, is a progressive neurodegenerative disorder. Evidence indicates that extra- or intracellular accumulation of beta-amyloid (Ab) peptides may initiate the development of AD. The basal forebrain neurons which provide the major cholinergic input to the hippocampus and neocortex, areas involved in learning and memory processing, are most severely affected in the AD brain. To date, very little is known regarding the cause of the preferential vulnerability of these neurons and their association to Ab peptides. We have reported that exogenous Ab, under acute conditions, can inhibit acetylcholine (ACh) release from the hippocampus and cortex, whereas prolonged exposure to the peptide can lead to the degeneration of rat septal cultured cholinergic neurons. However, the cellular mechanisms by which Ab affects ACh release and/or survival of cholinergic neurons remain unclear. Recently, some studies have indicated that intracellular Ab peptide can play a critical role in the degeneration of neurons - thus raising an intriguing possibility that exogenous Ab peptides may trigger degeneration of cholinergic neurons by increasing the levels of intracellular Ab peptide. We are currently investigating how extracellular Ab peptide can regulate intracellular Ab levels and their role in mediating the effects on cholinergic neurons in normal rat brain as well as in transgenic mice overexpressing Ab peptide. This study will provide the underlying basis of functional interrelationships between Ab peptides and central cholinergic system and will define whether inhibition of Ab production can prevent the onset and/or retard the progression of AD.",1 yr 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=176009&lang=en
176011,Assessment of survey sampling methodologies for studying hard to reach populations: Minority Francophones in Calgary,Quan  Hude,"Quan, Hude; King-Shier, Kathryn M",University of Calgary,Alberta,Canada,200812,50000.0,Catalyst Grant: Official Language Minority Communities in Health Research,Operating Grants,Health systems / services,Health Services and Policy Research,Alberta; Calgary; Hard To Reach Populations; Media And Advertising; Minority Fracophones; Respondent Driven Sampling; Sampling Methodologies,"The purpose of this proposed study is to assess sampling methodologies for studying minority Francophones. Minority francophones are like hard to reach or hidden populations as they are hidden from the point of view of sampling. This makes it difficult to generate a representative sample of the population from which inferences can be made. 
Objectives: 1) To compare socio-demographic composition among minority Francophone respondents to Respondent Driven Sampling (RDS), advertising and either of the RDS and advertising with that among Francophone respondents to the CCHS 3.1 and Census 2006 in Alberta; 2). To compare health status and health services utilizations among minority Francophone respondents to RDS, advertising and either of the RDS and advertising with that among minority Francophone respondents to the CCHS 3.1 in Alberta.
Research questions: 1) Does advertising and RDS methods generate a sample representative of the population of minority Francophones in Alberta? 2) Does the mixed method of RDS and advertising generate a more population representative sample than individual method of RDS and advertising? 
In this proposed study, we will conduct two cross-sectional surveys, first using RDS and then advertising to generate two datasets and assess population representativeness of the samplings with Census 2006 and CCHS cycle 3.1. The comparability across these databases will be assessed using variables of demography, population health and health services utilization.  Advertisement is likely to miss new immigrants, and people with low socio-economic status. To overcome the potential bias, RDS will be employed to reach these specific populations. With its reliance on social networks, RDS has the potential to reach individuals who do not go to public venues, read newspaper and listen to radio. We assume that the combined sample (RDS + advertising) is more comparable with that obtained from the CCHS and census than individual sampling method.",1 yr 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=176011&lang=en
176017,Lysine Methylation of Non-Histone Proteins,Binda  Olivier,"Binda, Olivier",Stanford University (California),California,United States of America,200810,150000.0,CIHR Fellowship,Fellowship Programs,Biomedical,Cancer Research,Chromatin; Histone; Lysine Methylation; Lysine Methyltransferase; Non-Histone Proteins; Protein-Protein Interaction,"In order to confine the human genome inside the nucleus, the cell has to compact 1.8meter of DNA inside a 6micron diameter space. To achieve this level of compaction, small proteins known as histones help the formation and organisation of the genome into chromatin and chromosomes. This extensive compaction of the genetic material put an incredible constraint on the availability of the genetic information. In order to regulate the genetic information accessibility, the histones are temporally and spacially modified by small molecules, which facilitate the timely compaction or relaxation of discreet regions of DNA. One such histone modification, lysine methylation (Kme), is laid down by lysine methyltranferase (KMT) enzymes. Several KMTs have clear links to cancer, suggesting a central role for this modification in maintaining cellular homeostasis and in neoplastic disease. Dynamic Kme of histone proteins regulates diverse cellular functions. In contrast, the biological functions of Kme on non-histone proteins, while rapidly evolving, is largely unexplored. Accumulating evidence suggests that small protein domains are involved in specific recognition and readout of the methyl marks. The field of Kme of non-histone proteins, still in its infancy, lacks the ""tools"" to easily and efficiently identify novel KMT substrates and sensors of this modification. I have therefore been involved in the development of a proteomic approach, using click chemistry, to identify by an unbiased approach additional KMT substrates. In parallel, I have developped an impartial screening method to identify novel sensors of Kme events. I plan to advance the study of the biological functions of novel protein Kme events that I have identified on a family of chromatin regulators and tumour suppressor proteins named ING, with the goal of elucidating how disruption in this signalling mark can trigger a pathologic state.",3 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=176017&lang=en
176022,"Independent and additive effects of caloric restriction, aerobic training and resistance training on mobility and related risk factors in older obese women",Brochu  Martin,"Brochu, Martin",Institut universitaire de g&eacute;riatrie de Sherbrooke,Qu&eacute;bec,Canada,200809,100000.0,Operating Grant - Priority Announcement: Aging (Bridge Funding),Operating Grants,Clinical,Aging,Aging; Caloric Restriction; Exercise Training; Mobility; Obesity; Weight Loss,"Background: Aging, obesity, and obesity related health problems (ie, type 2 diabetes, metabolic syndrome, inflammation profile, etc.) have been associated with mobility problems in older individuals. A few well-controlled studies using exercise with or without intentional caloric restriction (CR) have investigated the effectiveness of these approaches on mobility and related factors in obese elderly (> 65 yrs). So far, results are inconsistent due to methodological issues and study designs. Also, most studies were done in osteoarthritic or coronary patients, and little was done in well-functioning obese elderly; a population at high risk of developing mobility problems that could benefit from primary prevention program. Based on the current scientific literature, additional studies are needed to better understand the impact of the various factors associated with mobility, and to quantify the impact of behavioural approaches and/or preventive interventions in order to maintain or restore mobility and long term independence in elderly individuals.
We recently completed a pilot study in obese women aged 55 to 75 yrs to investigate the effects of a 12-week CR program with or without resistance training (RT) (1- CR alone, 2- RT alone, 3- CRT+RT) on mobility. We hypothesized that CR+RT would have greater effects on mobility than both modalities of intervention alone due to the independent effects of FM loss (CR) and improvement in muscle strength (RT). Overall, we found that mobility improved only in the RT group despite no changes in fat mass. No improvements in mobility were observed in the CR or CR+RT even though FM significantly decreased. Based on our results, the next step is to compare the independent and additive effects of CR, RT and aerobic training (AT)",1 yr 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=176022&lang=en
176030,Pathogenesis of age related macular degeneration (AMD),Matsubara  Joanne A,"Matsubara, Joanne A",University of British Columbia,British Columbia,Canada,200809,100000.0,Operating Grant - Priority Announcement: Aging (Bridge Funding),Operating Grants,Clinical,Aging,Advanced Glycation Endproducts; Age Related Macular Degeneration; Alzheimer'S Disease; Amyloid Beta; Chronic Inflammation; Drusen,"Age related macular degeneration (AMD) is the most common cause of irreversible vision loss in the elderly. Each year almost 80,000 Canadians are diagnosed with some form of AMD.  At present, there are an estimated 1 million people in Canada with AMD, and that number is expected to double by 2031. There are treatments to slow the progression of vision loss, but unfortunately, there are no cures available for AMD. In order to develop cures, further information about how and why AMD develops is needed.  Two important factors associated with disease progression are oxidative stress and inflammation.  Oxidative stress has been implicated in AMD, and results from a ten-year clinical study sponsored by the National Eye Institute (NEI, AREDs) reported that high dose antioxidant supplements significantly reduce the risk of advanced AMD by about 25 percent. Inflammation has also been implicated as several labs have demonstrated a strong association between polymorphisms of the complement factor H gene and AMD disease progression. The proposed studies will focus on two candidate triggers of oxidative stress and inflammation in the retina: amyloid beta (A-beta) and advanced glycation endproducts (AGEs).  Both A-beta and AGEs are constituents of drusen, the hallmark extracellular deposits of the 'dry' form of AMD. Both have been associated with oxidative stress and inflammatory processes in diseases of the brain and eye, including Alzheimer, AMD and diabetic retinopathy. The proposed studies will allow the development of new treatment regimens that target retinal inflammation and thus minimize the processes that 'trigger' the onset of macular degeneration.",1 yr 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=176030&lang=en
176059,Slowing Language Decline in Progressive Aphasia Through Language Rehabilitation: Treatment and Neuroimaging Study,Jokel  Regina,"Jokel, Regina",Baycrest Centre for Geriatric Care (Toronto),Ontario,Canada,200809,81530.0,Operating Grant - Priority Announcement: Aging (Bridge Funding),Operating Grants,Clinical,Aging,Dementia; Diffusion Tensor Imaging Tractography; Errorless Learning; Functional Magnetic Resonance Imaging; Language Rehabilitation; Primary Progressive Aphasia,"Progressive aphasia is characterized by a steady and progressive loss of language skills in presence of relatively preserved memory, attention, and thinking. While a multitude of resources is available to people who suffered language disorders as a result of a stroke, remarkably little has been done to address the decline of language in progressive aphasia. The aim of this study is slowing the progression of language decline in progressive aphasia via language therapy. The first goal of this study is to improve naming abilities of individuals with progressive aphasia. This will be accomplished by carrying out an intensive treatment approach via computer-based program for picture naming. The second goal is to evaluate whether language treatment is powerful enough to re-activate affected areas of the brain. This goal will be addressed with the use of brain scanning technique, the functional Magnetic Resonance Imaging and Tensor Diffusion Imaging. The third goal is to examine the effectiveness of self-guided language intervention on maintenance  effects. This will be the first group study addressing treatment in progressive aphasia and including imaging. It is hoped that findings will add to our understanding of language processing in progressive aphasia and facilitate treatment approaches in language rehabilitation in attempts to slow (or even halt) the language decline. This, in turn, may lead to improved quality of life (via longer personal independence), thereby reducing demands on the health care system.",1 yr 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=176059&lang=en
176064,Évaluation d'un programme communautaire de promotion de la vitalité cognitive pour les aînés,Laforest  Sophie,"Laforest, Sophie",Universit&eacute; de Montr&eacute;al,Qu&eacute;bec,Canada,200809,83079.0,Operating Grant - Priority Announcement: Aging (Bridge Funding),Operating Grants,Social / Cultural / Environmental / Population Health,Aging,Habitudes De Vie; Participation Sociale; Personnes Âgées; Promotion De La Santé; Vitalité Intellectuelle,"L'altération de la mémoire constitue une source importante de plaintes et de préoccupations, même chez les aînés qui vivent un vieillissement cognitif normal. Les programmes visant la vitalité intellectuelle sont considérés comme une stratégie prometteuse dans une optique de promotion d'un vieillissement actif. C'est dans cet esprit qu'une équipe du CSSS Cavendish a développé un programme de 10 rencontres (« Musclez vos méninges »), pouvant être offert par des animateurs du milieu communautaire, aux aînés préoccupés par les changements liés au vieillissement cognitif normal. Le programme vise à : 1) améliorer la confiance des participants en leur mémoire; 2) stimuler leurs facultés intellectuelles; 3) enseigner des stratégies mnémotechniques et 4) promouvoir l'adoption d'occupations stimulantes et d'habitudes de vie favorisantes. Les activités sont présentées selon une approche où l'accent est mis sur la participation active des aînés et sur la recherche d'applications concrètes des apprentissages dans le quotidien.  À l'automne 2007, une mise à l'essai auprès de sept groupes d'aînés âgés entre 60 et 90 ans, a permis d'ajuster son contenu et son format et d'en vérifier la pertinence. La présente recherche propose maintenant de vérifier l'efficacité du programme dans un devis quasi expérimental réalisé auprès d'aînés de 55 ans et plus, autonomes et ne présentant pas de troubles cognitifs, soit un groupe expérimental de 120 aînés qui recevront le programme la première année et un groupe témoin dont les 120 sujets attendront une année avant de recevoir le programme. Un questionnaire sera administré aux participants avant et immédiatement après le programme et huit mois après la fin du programme pour explorer les effets à court et plus long terme. Il documentera entre autres, les comportements de santé et les fonctions intellectuelles.",1 yr 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=176064&lang=en
176067,The interpretation and practice of family empowerment in home care nursing: palliative and chronic illness contexts,Stajduhar  Kelli I,"Stajduhar, Kelli I",University of Victoria (British Columbia),British Columbia,Canada,200809,95649.0,Operating Grant - Priority Announcement: Aging (Bridge Funding),Operating Grants,Social / Cultural / Environmental / Population Health,Aging,Chronic Illness; Ethnography; Family Caregiving; Home Care; Observational Research; Palliative Care,"In this research, we are examining how home care nurses practice ""family empowerment"" in their interactions with dying (palliative) patients and their families, and comparing this to how they practice it in interactions with patients and families that are not palliative. We are also interested in observing family members' experiences with home care nurses in these interactions. Not all family members may be comfortable with an empowerment approach - it is important to explore the reasons for this, as well as the implications for these family members' perceptions of their experiences with home care nursing. This research can help improve home care nursing practice with palliative patients and families, enhancing its effectiveness and ensuring that it provides appropriate kinds of support tailored to individual needs.",1 yr 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=176067&lang=en
176068,"Population-based longitudinal study of trajectories & predictors of health care utilization amongst the 50+ BC population, 1986-2003",Penning  Margaret J,"Penning, Margaret J",University of Victoria (British Columbia),British Columbia,Canada,200809,100000.0,Operating Grant - Priority Announcement: Aging (Bridge Funding),Operating Grants,Health systems / services,Aging,Administrative Health Data; Generalized Linear Modelling; Health Reform; Health Service Utilization; Older Vulnerable Subpopulations; Trajectories Of Care,"The present application is a request for renewal and extension of our longitudinal study of patterns and determinants of cancer health care utilization amongst the BC 50+ population. Over the next three years, we propose to extend our analyses to examine population health care utilization trajectories associated with aging.  We propose first, to describe health care utilization trajectories across the adult life course; second, to compare identified trajectories of care across diagnostic categories, starting with results from the present cancer grant, and including heart diseases and forms of arthritis; and third, to assess the social determinants of service trajectories and effects of policy reform on those trajectories. The latter will include using study results to evaluate both hierarchy-stress and fundamental cause hypotheses, expanded from the current grant.",1 yr 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=176068&lang=en
176076,D-serine and plasticity,Bergeron  Richard,"Bergeron, Richard",Ottawa Hospital Research Institute,Ontario,Canada,200809,100000.0,Operating Grant - Priority Announcement: Aging (Bridge Funding),Operating Grants,Biomedical,"Neurosciences, Mental Health and Addiction",Dementia; Glutamate; Hippocampus; Nmda Receptor; Whole-Cell Patch-Clamp,"Learning and memory require information exchange between brain cells in circuits that pair at least two different
environmental inputs in space and time. For example, when we meet someone new, visual and auditory pathways are
activated and this information is routed to the hippocampus, a brain region in which the convergent activity leads to storage
of information. Memory is the ability of the brain to re-call established circuits so that the next time we see the person or hear
his/her voice we remember his/her name. For reasons that remain elusive, these circuits are particularly vulnerable to
dysfunction in Alzheimer's disease (AD) patients. Subtle changes in these circuits are responsible for the death of brain cells
in regions of the brain where information is stored, one of which is the hippocampus. The death of populations of brain cells
in AD patients apparently occurs over a prolonged time period of many years, this is why, slowly but surely, AD patients lose
their memory and even their personalities. Due to advances in genetic engineered mice, we have generated a mouse line
with a phenotype that are similar to some of the characteristics of AD patients. Indeed, we have initiated some experiments
with these mice and we found that they behave like animals with memory deficits. I propose to study the hippocampus of
these animals using a multidisciplinary approach in order to better understand the chemicals known to be related to memory
impairment of AD patients. It is also hoped that the findings of our investigation will help to develop innovative treatments
for AD patients.",1 yr 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=176076&lang=en
176077,Relation between structural brain imaging and cognition in mixed and vascular mild cognitive impairment,Belleville  Sylvie N,"Belleville, Sylvie N","CIUSSS du Centre-Sud-de-l'&Icirc;le-de-Montr&eacute;al (Montr&eacute;al, Qu&eacute;bec)",Qu&eacute;bec,Canada,200809,100000.0,Operating Grant - Priority Announcement: Aging (Bridge Funding),Operating Grants,Clinical,Aging,Alzheimer'S Disease; Brain Imaging; Cognition; Mild Cognition Impairment; Mixed Dementia; Vascular Dementia,"Alzheimer's disease is the most common form of dementia. However, there is increasing evidence of a relationship between vascular dementia, which is characterized by the presence of cognitive deficits due to cerebrovascular lesions, and Alzheimer's disease. This raises questions regarding the distinction between Alzheimer's disease and vascular dementia, and the need for a better understanding of their similarities and differences. Importantly, a large proportion of persons diagnosed with Alzheimer's disease actually have mixed dementia; that is, they have vascular abnormalities in addition to Alzheimer's disease. It is important to identify these individuals, because clinicians don't use the same management approach for patients with only vascular dementia, patients with only Alzheimer's disease or those with mixed dementia. Unfortunately, it is difficult to diagnose these individuals with current clinical tools. The goal of this study is to assess whether magnetic resonance imaging, a brain imaging technique, can help identify individuals with Alzheimer's disease, vascular dementia or mixed dementia. We will also focus on a group of patients with very mild cognitive deficits. The brain of these participants will first be analyzed to identify brain anomalies. Patients will then be evaluated using neuropsychological tasks (of episodic memory, executive functions, psychomotor speed), and through neuropsychiatric examination. Participants will be followed longitudinally to assess the nature and progression of their deficits. This will allow a clearer understanding of whether the clinical outcome of those patients was primarily determined by brain abnormalities",1 yr 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=176077&lang=en
176078,The effects of cellular senescence on tissue regeneration,Beausejour  Christian,"Beausejour, Christian","Centre hospitalier universitaire Sainte-Justine (Montr&eacute;al, Qu&eacute;bec)",Qu&eacute;bec,Canada,200809,100000.0,Operating Grant - Priority Announcement: Aging (Bridge Funding),Operating Grants,Biomedical,Aging,Aging; Bone Marrow; Microenvironment; Plasticity; Senescence; Stem Cells,"Adult stem and progenitor cells represent a great potential for the repair of several tissues, mainly due to their capacity to differentiate in several cell type (i.e. skin, bone, muscle). We have observed that the environment in which stem cell reside has a large influence on the number of time a given stem/progenitor cell will divide and perhaps more importantly in which cell type it will differentiate.  Purification and injection of cells supporting stem cells (i.e. supporting fibroblasts) helps even further wounded tissues to repair (i.e. wounded skin). We also know that tissue repair is delayed as we get older. One possibility is that as we age, we accumulate tired cells that no longer divide: senescent cells. Our hypothesis is that accumulation of senescent cells in the microenvironment of stem cells prevents adequate regeneration of tissues. This hypothesis is supported by results we obtained showing that senescent cells are deficient in the activation of certain responses required for tissue repair following an injury. Also, in comparison to normal cells, senescent cells secrete molecules that may influence stem cell response. In conclusion, our objective is to identify how the accumulation of senescent cells possibly impairs tissue regeneration. The goal will be to either eliminate senescent cells or to complement their deficiencies in order to improve age-associated diseases.",1 yr 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=176078&lang=en
176082,"Measuring Objective Changes in the Physical, Psychological, and Radiographic Status of Patients Awaiting Hip or Knee Replacement Surgery",Aiken  Alice B,"Aiken, Alice B; Brouwer, Brenda J","Queen's University (Kingston, Ontario)",Ontario,Canada,200809,76207.0,"Operating Grant - PA: Musculoskeletal Health, Arthritis, Skin and Oral Health",Operating Grants,Biomedical,Musculoskeletal Health and Arthritis,Arthroplasty; Health Status; Hip; Knee; Osteoarthritis,"The main goal of the proposed study is to determine the nature and extent of physical, psychological, and radiographic changes in patients awaiting hip and knee replacement surgery.  We propose that knowledge of the extent of physical, psychological, and radiographic changes of those awaiting these surgeries could provide input how rapidly they decline, the relationship between physical and psychological decline, and determine critical indicators of decline that could be amenable to treatment.  The secondary goal of the study is to determine if physical or psychological change in the first three months on a wait list is predictive of the patients pre-surgery status. These goals will be achieved in a longitudinal study involving patients referred for first-time hip or knee replacement surgery to an academic health science centre.  This study is part of an ongoing program of research in which the ultimate goal is to validate an original,surgical prioritization tool based on critical markers of decline, and develop and evaluate targeted conservative management strategies in order to prolong or alleviate the need for surgery for patients with hip or knee osteoarthritis.",1 yr 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=176082&lang=en
176088,Damage Mechanics and Mechanisms in Ligament and Tendon,Thornton  Gail M,"Thornton, Gail M",University of Calgary,Alberta,Canada,200809,73019.0,"Operating Grant - PA: Musculoskeletal Health, Arthritis, Skin and Oral Health",Operating Grants,Biomedical,Musculoskeletal Health and Arthritis,Collagen; Damage; Injury; Ligament; Proteoglycan; Tendon,Damaging loads injure ligaments and tendons differently based on differences in how their structures are assembled. The assembly of these structures during maturation may be affected by the absence or presence of estrogen. Findings will be applicable as design parameters for replacement materials and may provide insight into injuries in adolescent female athletes.,1 yr 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=176088&lang=en
176102,Role of Machanosensitive Pathways in Ligament Remodelling,Bray  Robert C,"Bray, Robert C",University of Calgary,Alberta,Canada,200809,94733.0,"Operating Grant - PA: Musculoskeletal Health, Arthritis, Skin and Oral Health",Operating Grants,Clinical,Musculoskeletal Health and Arthritis,Angiogenesis; Anterior Cruciate Ligament; Mechanotransduction; Medial Collateral Ligament; Osteoarthritis,"Injury to the anterior cruciate ligament (ACL) causes instability of the knee, resulting in other knee structures being subjected to abnormal forces. These supporting joint connective tissues such as the medial collateral ligament respond to joint onstability by forming a scar, becoming inflamed, and increasing their blood supply. This results in pain and swelling of the knee and eventually leads to ostoearthritis. The aim of this work is to determine how altered mechanics of the knee joint after tearing of the ACL are responsible for the initiation and propagation of ligament remodelling and inflammation in the ACL deficient knee.",1 yr 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=176102&lang=en
176103,Arthritogenicity of the immune response to citrulline in mice and in human Rheumatoid Arthritis.,Cairns  Ewa,"Cairns, Ewa",Western University (Ontario),Ontario,Canada,200809,100000.0,"Operating Grant - PA: Musculoskeletal Health, Arthritis, Skin and Oral Health",Operating Grants,Biomedical,Musculoskeletal Health and Arthritis,Citrulline And Anti-Citrulline Antibodies; Hla-Drb1*0401 Transgenic Mice; Ra Patients; Rheumatoid Arthritis (Ra); T And B Cell Responses,"Rheumatoid Arthritis (RA) is a common, chronic and crippling disease that destroys cartilage and bone in the joints. The cause of RA is not known but it has been shown that a molecule called the shared epitope (SE) which is genetically influenced is frequent in those with RA. In addition to the SE, those with RA have antibodies against proteins that have been altered by citrulline (we'll call these anti-citrulline antibodies). These antibodies: 1) are very specific indicators for RA and 2) often occur before RA starts and thus, can be used to predict who is at risk to develop RA. Those with RA who have high amounts of these antibodies have more severe disease. These findings suggest that anti-citrulline antibodies participate in, or even directly cause, RA.  This possibility is further strengthened by the fact that anti-citrulline antibodies attack citrullinated proteins which are found in RA joints.  

Our research group developed a new mouse model that mimics human RA. This mouse is called DR4 transgenic (DR4 tg) mouse. It was genetically engineered to have the SE found in human RA.  We were able to induce anti-citrulline antibodies and arthritis in these mice. 

The proposed studies will examine directly whether, when and how anti-citrulline antibodies and/or cells involved in their production cause arthritis. To answer these questions we will isolate anti-citrulline antibodies and cells from arthritic DR4 tg mice and from RA patients at various stages of the disease. We will inject these anti-citrulline antibodies or cells into healthy mice and determine whether the injected mice develop arthritis.

These studies should provide new insight into the cause of RA and allow the design of new forms of therapy or specific treatment directed at blocking the production of anti-citrulline antibodies and/or their citrullinated protein targets in the joints.",1 yr 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=176103&lang=en
176104,Effect of 18 Months of Teriparatide Therapy on Bone Microarchitecture and Bone Volume in Postmenopausal Women with Osteoporosis,Cheung  Angela M,"Cheung, Angela M",University Health Network (Toronto),Ontario,Canada,200809,77518.0,"Operating Grant - PA: Musculoskeletal Health, Arthritis, Skin and Oral Health",Operating Grants,Clinical,Musculoskeletal Health and Arthritis,High Resolution Peripheral Quantitative Computer Tomography; Open Label Before And After Study; Postmenopausal Women With Osteoporosis; Teriparatide,"Clinical trials have shown that teriparatide, a bone formation drug, increases bone mineral density (BMD) at the lumbar spine and total hip, but decreases BMD at the forearm after 20 months of therapy.  It is unclear whether this decrease in BMD at the forearm is because of bone growth with resulting increased bone mass and no change in bone mineral content (which will increase bone strength and decrease fracture risk) or whether teriparatide therapy is site-specific and has a negative effect at the forearm.  Currently, there is a new technology, high resolution pQCT (HR-pQCT) that can assess bone geometry without a biopsy.  Since bone strength is affected both by BMD and bone structure (as well as other material properties), our group is interested in examining changes in bone geometry at the forearm and ankle in postmenopausal women with osteoporosis who receives 18 months of teriparatide therapy.

We believe that this new approach of measuring bone strength will help us better understand whether teriparatide has different effects at different bone sites.  In addition, measuring different aspects of bone strength such as the structural properties of bone (size and shape, and geometry) and the material composition (bone mineral content or BMD) will increase our understanding of the mechanisms of teriparatide treatment at different bone sites. In the end, this data will help clinicians explain the pros and cons of this therapy to their postmenopausal patients with osteoporosis.",1 yr 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=176104&lang=en
176107,Regulation and Function of Periostin in Wound Healing,Hamilton  Douglas W,"Hamilton, Douglas W",Western University (Ontario),Ontario,Canada,200809,90400.0,"Operating Grant - PA: Musculoskeletal Health, Arthritis, Skin and Oral Health",Operating Grants,Biomedical,Musculoskeletal Health and Arthritis,Dermis; Extracellular Matrix; Gene Regulation; Matricellular Proteins; Periostin; Wound Healing,"During healing of skin, cells form a scaffold within the wound known as the provisional matrix. The matrix allows cells to move into the wound and repair the damaged tissue. The matrix is composed of many different proteins, some of which are only expressed in injuries. These proteins are known as matricellular proteins and we will study how one member of this family, periostin, helps skin wounds close. Periostin appears in the wound at 3 days and we will use in vitro and in vivo experiments to assess the molecular regulation of periostin, and what functions it plays in the repair process. This proposal could provide new targets to help speed wound repair in skin.",1 yr 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=176107&lang=en
176111,"Aging, CMV and Alzheimer disease: could immunosenescence be a common pathway?",Fulop  Tam&agrave;s,"Fulop, Tamàs",Universit&eacute; de Sherbrooke,Qu&eacute;bec,Canada,200809,100000.0,Operating Grant - Priority Announcement: Aging (Bridge Funding),Operating Grants,Biomedical,Aging,Alzheimer Disease; Cholestérol; Cmv Infection Chronique; Culture De Cellules; Facscan; Fonctions Et Phenotypes Des Cellules T; Signalisation Intracellulaire; Vieillissement,"Alzheimer disease (AD) is the most common form of dementia. Its pathological hallmarks include profound neuronal loss, presence of intraneuronal neurofibrillary tangles and deposition of beta amyloid protein (A). This disease, although phenotypically manifested as cognitive deficits, exhibits pathologic traits that are suggestive of a systemic disorder. One school of thought puts A at center-stage of immune reactions leading to the development of a chronic inflammatory process. According to this hypothesis, during the early phases of AD, immunity seeks to eliminate the overproduced A in the periphery by mounting a beneficial (acute) inflammatory response, resulting in T cell activation and production of specific antibodies. Thus, the cellular immune response may play a crucial role in protection via antigenic activation. Consistent with such a role in defence, A-reactive cells are also found in healthy persons. However, especially T cell immunity is compromised in the elderly, a state designated: immunosenescence, characterised by the accumulation of dysfunctional end-stage differentiated T cells. These are often associated with infection by the common persistent Herpes virus HHV5 (cytomegalovirus, CMV). However, CMV infection has been linked to cognitive impairment in the elderly in longitudinal studies. CMV might thus be one of the prime driving forces behind many of the alterations associated with immunosenescence and the manner in which CMV and the host immune system interact might also contribute in determining the ""age"" of adaptive immunity and hence age-associated diseases such as AD. This project is aimed at studying putative relationships between aging, dementia and the impact of CMV in an effort to establish the extent to which disease course may be influenced by the dynamics of the cellular immune response. Such knowledge could lead to novel treatment strategies based on manipulation of immunity and/or viral infection.",1 yr 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=176111&lang=en
176121,Neural and Biomechanical Control of Turning in People with Stroke,Lam  Tania,"Lam, Tania",University of British Columbia,British Columbia,Canada,200809,235759.0,Operating Grant Priority Announcement: Mobility in Aging,Operating Grants,Biomedical,"Neurosciences, Mental Health and Addiction",Centre Of Pressure; Electromyography; Functional Mobility; Stroke; Treadmill Training; Turning,"Although many people who had a stroke can get better and walk again, there are still problems with walking that limit their ability to fully take part in many daily activities. Up to now, stroke researchers have usually tested walking by asking people to walk forwards in a straight line. However, in everyday life people must constantly change their direction or turn while walking. The ability to turn is important to make sure that people are able to walk around safely and easily in their homes as well as outside in their communities. In addition, turning also poses a greater risk of falling compared with walking straight ahead. Despite these facts, there is very little research about turning and walking in people with stroke. Thus the overall objectives of this research are to understand how difficulties in walking affect turning in people with stroke. We will use recordings of muscle activity and leg movements during walking to analyze the differences in turning strategies in people with stroke compared with people who have not had a stroke. We will also study the extent to which different rehabilitation therapies for improving walking also help to improve turning ability in people who have had a stroke. The results from this research will help us develop better testing tools and training strategies for therapists to use as they work to help people who have had a stroke walk as well as possible. Ultimately, better walking ability will help promote healthier and more active lifestyles for people who have had a stroke.",3 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=176121&lang=en
176143,Functional Lateralization of Spatial Cue Use: An Avian Model of Aging,Kelly  Debbie,"Kelly, Debbie",University of Saskatchewan,Saskatchewan,Canada,200809,150000.0,Regional Partnership Program New Investigator Award,Salary Programs,Biomedical,Aging,Animal Model; Cognitive Impairment In Aging; Geometric And Featural Cues; Lateralization; Sex Differences; Spatial Memory,"The western population is rapidly aging.  Recent estimates suggest that in less than five years the proportion of individuals over the age of 65 will increase by 30%.  As one ages many cognitive abilities, including the processing of spatial information, decline.  Research has shown that aging may differentially affect how the two hemispheres of the brain are recruited to complete specific tasks. In particular, research suggests that with age, tasks that in younger individuals predominately engage only one hemisphere, show bilateral activation.  A rich body of knowledge in this area has accrued over the recent years.  However, much of this research has utilized fMRI or tachistoscope techniques requiring a stationary participant and typically brief stimulus presentations.  Being able to examine the effects of aging on functional lateralization using more naturalistic tasks would greatly contribute to our understanding of the underlying mechanisms and behavioral consequences of hemispheric asymmetry and the affect that aging has on hemispheric lateralization. The development of an avian model allows for this possibility.  Birds present a unique opportunity to study lateralization of function due to the anatomical arrangements that channel information from one eye directly into the opposite brain hemisphere - a ""natural split-brain"" situation.  Thus, the function of each hemisphere may be studied repeatedly within the same animal simply by blocking one eye with a patch.  This situation is not available in current mammalian models.  Therefore, the overall objective of the proposed research is to use the pigeon to investigate how aging affects how the two hemispheres of our brain differentially process spatial information, and how aging influences the processing of this information.",5 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=176143&lang=en
176147,Identification of Risk of Adverse Activity Transition Following a Distal Radius Fracture,MacDermid  Joy C,"MacDermid, Joy C; Grewal, Ruby",McMaster University,Ontario,Canada,200809,241618.0,Operating Grant Priority Announcement: Mobility in Aging,Operating Grants,Clinical,Aging,Distal Radius (Wrist) Fractures (Drf); Health Risks; Older Adults,"Distal radius (wrist) fractures (DRF) are common and thought to be inconsequential, but can cause significant disability.  We see DRF as a signal event where some people are at-risk of transitioning from an active lifestyle to inactivity and subsequent health risks.  This study will establish the reliability/validity/variability of bone quality, mobility, and activity measures in patients 50-80 years of age under active treatment for a DRF and determine the relative importance of baseline physical impairments, activity level,  social support and personal/injury factors on loss of activity/participations after a DRF.  
Research design: Prospective cohort (embedded reliability study at 0 and 6 months). 
Subjects: 195 patients aged 50-80 years of age who have incurred a wrist fracture (no previous history of humeral, hip or vertebral fracture). Reliability retest sample= 50. 
Follow-up: baseline fracture clinic visit, 2, 3, 6, 12 months following fracture. 
Potential Predictors:  Bone densitometry, lower extremity strength, 6-minute walk, pre-injury activity level, balance, self-efficacy, fear avoidance, wrist pain, comorbidity, social support.  
Outcomes: Primary: Change in Activity/Participation at 6 months; Secondary:  Patient-rated-wrist evaluation (fracture outcome), Changes in Balance, 6-minute walk, Comorbidity, Strength.  Controls over bias: use of independent assessor, standardized measures and follow-up intervals, use of inception cohort, multiple procedures to reduce loss to follow-up.
Analysis: We will establish inter-occasion reliability using ICCs and SEM; quantitative changes in outcome measures using repeated measures ANOVA and use multiple linear stepwise regression to identify predictors of loss of activity and participation following DRF.

This work will help launch a large cohort study and research program on helping older adults successful resume a healthy lifestyle following DRF.",3 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=176147&lang=en
176150,Identifying the Neurocognitive Impairments Associated with Recurrent Falling Among Community-Dwelling Seniors,Liu-Ambrose  Teresa Y,"Liu-Ambrose, Teresa Y; Handy, Todd C",University of British Columbia,British Columbia,Canada,200809,300000.0,Operating Grant Priority Announcement: Mobility in Aging,Operating Grants,Clinical,Aging,Cognitive Function; Executive Functions; Falls; Fmri; Older Adults,"Falls is a common geriatric syndrome and approximately 30% of community-dwellers over the age of 65 experience one or more falls per year. Global cognitive impairment defined as a Folstein's Mini-Mental State Examination (MMSE) score < 24/30 is a key risk factor for falls. But recent evidence suggests that even mild reductions in cognitive abilities among seniors without a diagnosis of cognitive impairment increase falls risk. Specifically, evidence suggests that reduced executive functioning -- the ability to concentrate, to attend selectively, and to plan and strategize -- is associated with increased falls risk among seniors with ""intact"" global cognitive function (i.e., MMSE score equal to or greater than 24/30). This is a critical public health issue because a large number and proportion of seniors are without frank global cognitive impairment. 

Currently, the neural basis for the association between reduced executive functioning and falls is unknown. In our previous work using functional MRI, we showed that senior fallers demonstrated a different neural activity pattern while performing a task of executive function from senior non-fallers. Specifically, fallers had a significantly lower hemodynamic response in the right posterior cerebellum. This is a significant finding because the cerebellum is not only responsible for normal motor function (i.e., movement), it also involved in executive functioning (e.g., planning of movement), and hence, may represent a critical interface between mobility and cognition. We propose that identifying regional differences in neural activity between recurrent fallers and non-fallers would refine the focus of future research in the area of cognition and mobility among seniors and in turn lead to the refinement and development of behavioural, cognitive, or neuropharmacological interventions for falls prevention.",3 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=176150&lang=en
176152,Studies on p97 (Melanotransferrin),Jefferies  Wilfred A,"Jefferies, Wilfred A",University of British Columbia,British Columbia,Canada,200809,100000.0,Operating Grant - Priority Announcement: Aging (Bridge Funding),Operating Grants,Biomedical,Aging,Alzheimer'S Disease; Inflammation; Iron; Microglia; Oxidative Radicals; P97,"Iron is critical for life. However, iron can contribute to disease if it not directly held under check. For example, it is known that iron can lead to damage in the brains of Alzheimer's disease (AD) patients. AD is a progressive and fatal brain disease that is the most common form of dementia (loss of memory and other intellectual abilities relating to daily life). There is no cure and diagnosis can only be confirmed after death. A hallmark of the disease are deposits in the brain made up of protein fragments called amyloid-beta. It is believed that Abeta is one factor directly responsible for killing the brain. The build up iron in and around these plaques is believed to make the disease even worse. A protein that binds iron, called melanotransferrin (p97), might play an important role in AD because it can affect how iron gets delivered to the brain. We believe that p97 plays a very important role in AD but this exact relationship is not very clear. The p97 protein may one day be used to diagnose patients for AD faster and thus start treatment sooner. However, to do this we want to clarify how, when and where p97 functions under normal and disease conditions. To do this, we will study where p97 is in relation to other features found only in the brains of AD patients using powerful microscopes. Next, we will study the biology of p97 using a genetically engineered mouse to see what happens when you remove p97 from a living organism. Finally, to study how big of a role that p97 plays in AD, we will make a special mouse that has Alzheimer's like disease but can't make p97. If p97 does play an important role in AD, then this information will help make faster and more accurate diagnosis for AD. Currently, the only to make 100% sure that someone had AD is to look at the brain after death. A faster diagnosis means treatment can be begin sooner.",1 yr 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=176152&lang=en
176154,The relationship of cardiovascular health indicators with frontal-executive cognitive and motor function with aging,Hughson  Richard L,"Hughson, Richard L",University of Waterloo (Ontario),Ontario,Canada,200809,300000.0,Operating Grant Priority Announcement: Mobility in Aging,Operating Grants,Biomedical,Aging,Aging; Brain Blood Flow; Cognitive Function; Dementia; Motor Function; Vascular Function,"It is well known that as we get older, our brains lose their ability to remember and our performance of motor tasks is reduced. Recently, it has been determined that diseases of the cardiovascular system increase the risk of poor mental and physical performance.
We will study healthy older men and women over the age of 65 who are living in their own homes or in retirement communities and long-term care facilities. In each person, we will use noninvasive methods to study the structure of the blood vessels, we will take a blood sample to determine the factors that are linked to cardiovascular disease, and we will have each person complete a series of tests to determine their ability to remember items, solve problems and perform movements. We will then look for the changes in the cardiovascular system that are most strongly related to changes in brain function.
This will be the first study to in detail factors linking peripheral cardiovascular disease and a reduction in brain blood flow with a range of tests of brain function to allow for a more specific identification of the memory or motor performance tasks that are most affected. Previous studies have focused on indicators of brain function that were not very sensitive to the small changes that occur early in the aging process. Our results will provide information that will be useful in better understanding how cardiovascular disease in combination with aging affects cognitive and motor functioning with a view to eventually developing effective intervention programs to prevent/reduce these changes. Such information will provide important feedback to professional and family caregivers in long-term care facilities to assist with improving the quality of life of the elderly.",3 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=176154&lang=en
176203,Investigation into the role of bacteria on aging in Drosophila,Seroude  Laurent,"Seroude, Laurent","Queen's University (Kingston, Ontario)",Ontario,Canada,200809,100000.0,Operating Grant - Priority Announcement: Aging (Bridge Funding),Operating Grants,Biomedical,Genetics,Innate Immunity; Longevity; Molecular Genetics; Real-Time Pcr; Rnai,"Bacteria and infection play a key role in regulating longevity. A careful modulation of immune responses is essential to maximizing longevity. A wealth of data on the decline of immune function with age and the associated increased susceptibility to bacterial infection has led to the widespread use of antibiotics and disinfectants in everyday life. While there is little doubt that these manipulations have saved lives, their very success may have undercut additional strategies for life extension based on exploiting beneficial associations with microbes. Our findings that bacteria have a strong positive influence on longevity early in life suggest that understanding bacterial host interactions is very important for studying aging.
Experiments performed in invertebrates such as Drosophila are fundamental to facilitate and accelerate our understanding the role of bacteria in aging.",1 yr 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=176203&lang=en
176204,Splice variant and paralog specific analysis of the gamma secretase - amyloid precursor protein complexome,Schmitt-Ulms  Gerold,"Schmitt-Ulms, Gerold",University of Toronto,Ontario,Canada,200809,100000.0,Operating Grant - Priority Announcement: Aging (Bridge Funding),Operating Grants,Biomedical,Aging,Alzheimer Disease; Chemical Crosslinking; Complexome; Lentiviral Technology; Mass Spectrometry; Protein-Protein Interactions,A key event in the molecular manifestation of Alzheimer disease is the aberrant proteolytic cleavage of the amyloid precursor protein (APP) by a multi-protein enzyme complex referred to as gamma-secretase. Attempts to devise a therapeutic strategy that targets gamma-secretase complexes have proven difficult because the substrate specificity and molecular architecture of a heterogeneous population of gamma-secretase complexes is only poorly understood. We have developed crosslinking methodologies that enable identification of protein complex constituents and facilitate topological characterization of protein complexes. We propose to apply these methods to the gamma-secretase-APP complexome to uncover a feature of APP processing that can be exploited to derive an effective therapeutic strategy.,1 yr 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=176204&lang=en
176208,Modulation of the CNS immune status is necessary for full recovery from  Alzheimer's disease.,Mclaurin  Joanne,"Mclaurin, Joanne","Centre for Research in Neurodegenerative Disease (Toronto, Ontario)",Ontario,Canada,200809,100000.0,Operating Grant - Priority Announcement: Aging (Bridge Funding),Operating Grants,Biomedical,Aging,Alzheimer'S Disease; Amyloid; Cognition; Inflammation; Macrophage,"Amyloid disorders, such as Alzheimer's disease and vascular dementia, are characterized by loss of CNS homeostasis and neurodegeneration leading to cognitive decline.  The common and central feature of these diseases is amyloid deposition, of which the major component is the amyloid beta peptide (Abeta). To improve treatment of patients and thereby decrease the associated mortality and morbidity, we propose that only early and prolonged treatment with multiple therapeutic strategies will be effective.   One component of a multi-drug approach is to re-balance the immunological status of the CNS to promote homeostasis and decrease secondary injury.  Using an in vivo model, we will examine the physiological outcome of antagonizing inflammation within the brain to determine the extent of cognitive improvements. Our preliminary results suggest that both parenchymal and perivascular amyloid contribute to disease pathogenesis and only by addressing both will we improve the lives of afflicted individuals.",1 yr 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=176208&lang=en
176210,ProNGF and its role in cell survival and death in Alzheimer's disease,Fahnestock  Margaret,"Fahnestock, Margaret",McMaster University,Ontario,Canada,200809,100000.0,Operating Grant - Priority Announcement: Aging (Bridge Funding),Operating Grants,Biomedical,"Neurosciences, Mental Health and Addiction",Alzheimer'S Disease; Nerve Growth Factor; Neurotrophic Activity; Neurotrophin Receptors; Protein Processing; Retrograde Transport,"Neurotrophins are small but essential proteins found in the brain and nervous system that govern critical aspects of cell-cell communication, neuronal function and survival, and repair after injury.  We were one of the first labs to demonstrate that protein precursors called proneurotrophins are the predominant form of these molecules in the brain and that they have biological activity, although the nature of that activity is now hotly debated.  In Alzheimer's disease, one of these proneurotrophins, proNGF, accumulates in areas of the brain necessary for cognition, learning and memory, and this accumulation correlates with cognitive decline. The mechanisms causing abnormal proNGF accumulation and how that affects neuronal function are not well understood.  Our proposed research will investigate whether proNGF accumulation is a cause or a consequence of neuronal degeneration and will elucidate the relative roles of receptor loss and defective proNGF transport from axon terminals to cell bodies, as well as mechanisms of neuronal loss, i.e. loss of neurotrophic support or gain of apoptotic activity, in the demise of these neurons.  The importance of proNGF's biological activity to neuronal function and disease and the possibility of unexpected new activities and roles for proNGF have already been demonstrated.  Our proposed project will clarify how changes in proNGF trafficking contribute to synaptic dysfunction, neuronal atrophy and loss of cognitive function. We will determine how proNGF biological activity is regulated by and contributes to Alzheimer's-induced changes, further demonstrating proNGF's importance to the normal and the diseased or injured nervous system.",1 yr 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=176210&lang=en
176223,"Impact of long-term consumption of high protein diets on renal health, hypertension, glucose handling and adipose metabolism in obesity - implications for dietary reference intakes",Aukema  Harold M,"Aukema, Harold M",University of Manitoba,Manitoba,Canada,200809,100000.0,Operating Grant - Priority Announcement: Obesity,Operating Grants,Biomedical,"Nutrition, Metabolism and Diabetes",Adipose Metabolism; Dietary Protein; Glucose Handling; Homocysteine; Hypertension; Kidney; Obesity,"With more than half of the Canadian population being overweight, the incentive to use high protein diets for weight loss is substantial.  However, although the dietary recommendations for Canadians appear to condone high protein diets, the committee that wrote these recommendations stated that more research on the safety of high protein diets is needed.  

Our previous work suggested that high protein diets have subtle, yet detrimental effects on the normal kidney in the long-term.  However, obese individuals already have marginally compromised kidneys and therefore it is likely that high protein diets will have greater effects on these kidneys.  High homocysteine levels (an indicator of increased disease risk) in obese individuals also may be worsened further with high protein diets.  On the other hand, high protein diets may have beneficial effects on fat tissue, as well as on important health issues related to obesity, including the risk of diabetes and hypertension. 

The purpose of this study is to examine the effects of high protein diets on health indices in obesity using a rat model.  Specific health parameters to be assessed will include effects on the kidney, homocysteine metabolism, blood pressure, blood sugar handling and fat tissue.  In addition, this study also will examine the effect of protein type on these health effects.  Further, it will examine whether the effects are reversible, and whether the effects are similar in growing animals, since the long-term consequences of a high protein diet during youth are not known.  Finally, the effects of high protein diets under caloric restriction also will be examined.

These studies will furnish information and biomarkers of health status that will be useful for future studies in humans and that are relevant to the dietary recommendations for protein intake.",1 yr 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=176223&lang=en
176261,(Mis)perceptions about healthy eating: effects on food intake and appetite in men and women.,Provencher  Veronique,"Provencher, Veronique",Universit&eacute; Laval,Qu&eacute;bec,Canada,200809,81412.0,Operating Grant - Priority Announcement: Obesity,Operating Grants,Clinical,"Nutrition, Metabolism and Diabetes",Appetite Sensations; External Cues; Healthy Eating; Laboratory-Study Design; Obesity; Restrained Eating,"In the face of an increased prevalence of obesity and chronic diseases in Canada, much effort has been invested to educate the population about healthy eating.  Although Canadians are now aware of the importance of healthier food habits, rates of obesity and chronic diseases are still increasing.  In addition, even if different labelling strategies are used to identify healthier foods in the market, consumers remain confused about what healthy eating should be.  Might describing foods as healthy have unintended side-effects on food intake?  Previous literature has shown that perceptions about the healthiness of foods may bias estimations of caloric content of foods, leading consumers to underestimate the caloric content of ""healthy"" food choices.  Indeed, we have recently shown that perceiving a food as healthy increased intake of that food by 35% in undergraduate female students.  The general objective of the proposed research is to better understand how and why perceived healthiness, and ""fatteningness,"" of food influence intake and appetite sensations in normal-weight and overweight/obese restrained and unrestrained males and females.  This research will increase our knowledge of the effects of external cues (and other psychological and physiological factors) on the control of food intake. Because the popularity and demand for nutrition information is increasing, such information is needed to improve clinical practices aiming at promoting sustainable healthy eating habits to help individuals achieve and maintain a healthy weight.",1 yr 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=176261&lang=en
176299,Vascular Cognitive Impairement: Animal Models of Co-morbidity,Cechetto  David F,"Cechetto, David F",Western University (Ontario),Ontario,Canada,200810,5000.0,Emerging Team Grant: Co-morbidity of brain disorders &amp; other health problems-LOI,Operating Grants,Biomedical,"Neurosciences, Mental Health and Addiction",Alzheimer'S Disease; Diabetes; Neurodegeneration; Neuroinflammation; Stroke; Vascular Cognitive Impairment,"Investigations in humans clearly demonstrate a relationship between Alzheimer's Disease and other diseases such affecting the blood vessels of the brain which include stroke, diabetes, high blood pressure, and clogged arteries. For example, even the risk of developing Alzheimer's Disease is increased in individuals who have other conditions such as small regions of brain damage due to small strokes, diabetes, increased blood pressure, clogged arteries, or fluctuations in the rhythm of the heart. We have already developed combined models of Alzheimer's Disease and some of these blood vessel diseases. When we create a brain environment that is similar to an older brain or the earliest stages of Alzheimer's Disease, the addition of a small stroke results in much greater brain damage which is accompanied by a much greater loss of memory or the ability to learn. Thus, examining animal models of stroke and diabetes in the presence of brain chemistry that is associated with old age or early Alzheimer's Disease will provide insight into the changes that take place which lead to early reduction in brain function with aging. For this proposal, we have assembled a team of investigators with considerable wide ranging experience, including clinical expertise, brain imaging techniques, expertise in the brain's ability to generate new brain cells, clinical and animal expertise in pathology and animal models of Alzheimer's Disease, stroke and diabetes. This allows us to examine multiple changes in the deterioration of the brain and the changes in memory and learning of animal models of stroke and diabetes in the presence of elevated levels of a chemical in the brain associated with brain aging and Alzheimer's Disease. These models will be critical in allowing us to determine which new drugs being developed will be most effective to treat the brain before full dementia occurs. Our close relationship with clinical experts also allow us to examine the relationship of these findings to humans.",1 yr 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=176299&lang=en
176317,Delineation of the Relationships Between Proton Pump Inhibitor (PPI) Use and the Development of Osteoporosis and Osteoporosis Related Fractures,Targownik  Laura E,"Targownik, Laura E",University of Manitoba,Manitoba,Canada,200809,150000.0,New Investigator Award - Osteoporosis,Salary Programs,Clinical,Musculoskeletal Health and Arthritis,Fractrures; Gastroesophageal Reflux Disease (Gerd); Osteoporosis; Proton Pump Inhibitors,"Proton pump inhibitors (PPIs) are among the most commonly prescribed medications in clinical practice. PPIs are the most effective medications for reducing the production of stomach acid, and as a result are very effective for the treatment and prevention of upper gastrointestinal diseases, including gastroesophageal reflux (GERD) and peptic ulcer disease. These medications are generally believed to be safe, though recent studies have suggested that the use of these medications is associated with the development of osteoporosis related fractures, including those of the hip, spine, and wrist.  However it is unclear whether the relationship between PPIs and osteoporosis-related fractures is causative, nor has the mechanism by which PPIs may promote osteoporosis or fractures been elucidated. 
PPIs are commonly used in the elderly, who are at the highest risk of developing osteoporosis and osteoporosis related fractures. Furthermore, osteoporosis related fractures, especially hip fractures, are associated with a high risk of death and disability, with up to 20% of people diagnosed with a hip fracture dying within six months, and a high proportion of survivors left with significant disability and loss of independence. Our determining that PPIs definitively contribute to the risk of osteoporosis and osteoporosis related fractures may therefore have a huge impact on patient care.
   Therefore, we are seeking to perform a number of related studies in man and in animal models with the aim of providing further information on the possible cause-and-effect relationship between PPIs, osteoporosis, and osteoporosis related fractures.",5 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=176317&lang=en
176325,Evaluation of a Practice-Modifying Knowledge Translation Program,Dormuth  Colin R,"Dormuth, Colin R",University of British Columbia,British Columbia,Canada,200809,300000.0,New Investigator Salary Award - PA: Knowledge Translation,Salary Programs,Health systems / services,Health Services and Policy Research,Dissemination; Drug Utilization; Education; Evaluation; Knowledge Translation; Prescribing Impacts,"Health care outcomes could be improved and money saved if prescribers adhered to antihypertesive therapy guidelines. We will measure impacts of confidential prescribing portraits with price information and evidence of drug effectiveness, plus small participation incentives, on prescribing by general practitioners (GPs).",5 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=176325&lang=en
176326,Les audits peuvent-ils améliorer la qualité des soins en obstétrique?,Dumont  Alexandre M,"Dumont, Alexandre M",Universit&eacute; de Montr&eacute;al,Qu&eacute;bec,Canada,200809,300000.0,New Investigator Salary Award - PA: Knowledge Translation,Salary Programs,Clinical,Gender and Health,Analyse Coût-Efficacité; Audit Clinique; Césarienne; Essai Contrôlé Randomisé; Mortalité Maternelle; Santé Reproductive,"La qualité des soins obstétricaux est un déterminant majeur la santé maternelle et périnatale au niveau international. Les techniques d'audit clinique semblent prometteuses pour améliorer la qualité des soins dans différents contextes.
L'Objectif principal est de définir, mettre en oeuvre et  évaluer des interventions complexes basées sur les audits visant à améliorer la qualité des services d'obstétrique et la santé des mères et des enfants. Les enjeux sont différents selon le contexte. Mon programme peut être divisé en deux volets selon les pays où les résultats des recherches seront obtenus : en Afrique de l'Ouest d'une part, et au Canada d'autre part.
Les objectifs spécifiques sont : (1) Evaluer, par un essai contrôlé randomisé (ECR), l'efficacité de l'implantation des audits de décès maternels dans les hôpitaux de références au Sénégal et au Mali. L'efficacité sera mesurée en termes de réduction de la mortalité maternelle ; (2) Evaluer, par un ECR, l'efficacité d'une stratégie basée sur les audits de césariennes dans différents hôpitaux au Québec. L'efficacité sera mesurée en termes de réduction des taux de césariennes.
Ce programme comporte des défis particuliers tels que l'étude pré-clinique des barrières à l'amélioration de la qualité des soins, la standardisation d'une intervention complexe adaptée au contexte, la randomisation par grappe, l'évaluation par une approche transdisciplinaire et la définition de critères de jugement pertinents.",5 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=176326&lang=en
176349,Evaluation of the Renin-Angiotensin System in Aboriginal People,Ahmed  Sofia B,"Ahmed, Sofia B",University of Calgary,Alberta,Canada,200809,300000.0,New Investigator Award - Priority Announcement: Clinical Research,Salary Programs,Clinical,Indigenous Peoples' Health,Aboriginal; Glomerular Hemodynamics; Glomerular Hyperfiltration; Renal Physiology; Renin-Angiotensin System; Salt,"There is a widespread recognition that Aboriginal people have a dramatically increased risk of kidney disease compared to the general population, though the reasons behind this discrepancy are unclear.  Despite this ever-increasing burden of kidney disease with its associated morbidity, mortality and cost to the Canadian health care system, the renal physiology, and specifically the renin-angiotensin system (RAS), of the Canadian Aboriginal people has never been studied.  The knowledge that the RAS is operative in this population could lead to rational treatments to delay progression, or even prevent initiation, of kidney disease.  It is the central hypothesis of this proposal that in the high-salt state (a state of maximal RAS suppression), healthy Aboriginal people will exhibit increased renal and systemic RAS activity, activation of which results in a predisposition to glomerulosclerosis and ultimately, kidney failure.

These experiments will be conducted in young, healthy Aboriginal and Caucasian subjects who are on a controlled sodium and protein diet.  Renal hemodynamic function will be assessed using classic inulin and para-aminohippurate (PAH) clearance techniques.",5 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=176349&lang=en
176369,Canadian Birth Cohort: Indoor Air and the Development of Asthma and Allergy,Subbarao  Padmaja,"Subbarao, Padmaja",Hospital for Sick Children (Toronto),Ontario,Canada,200809,300000.0,New Investigator Award - Priority Announcement: Clinical Research,Salary Programs,Social / Cultural / Environmental / Population Health,"Human Development, Child and Youth Health",Airway Inflammation; Allergy; Asthma; Birth Cohort; Environmental Influences On Health; Epigenetics; Genetics; Immunology; Innate Immunity; Longitudinal; Lung Function; Respiratory Infection,"Environmental exposures, diet, physical activity, stress and epigenetic changes may underlie increased childhood allergy and asthma. This funded study has been designed as a multidisciplinary, longitudinal, Canada-wide population-based cohort study (n = 5,000), to examine the interaction of genetic & environmental factors in asthma development. Women will be recruited early in pregnancy and children will be studied at birth, at a home visit at 3 months, and at clinic visits at ages 1, 3 and 5 years with intervening telephone questionnaires.  In Toronto, a subgroup of the cohort will have detailed assessments of infant lung function and airway inflammation at 3 months then yearly as well as detailed virologic studies in the first year of life. Allergic asthma at age 5 is the primary outcome on which the study is powered. Atopy, recurrent wheeze, food allergy, and allergic eczema are secondary outcomes. Environmental exposures will be assessed by questionnaire, home inspections, dust sampling and modeling of outdoor exposures. Immunological studies, genetic and epigenetic testing of DNA will be performed. Nutrition, viral and bacterial infections will be studied with a focus in infancy. Pulmonary function, airway inflammation, acquired and innate immunity, psychosocial factors and stress will be assessed. Family-based genetic testing will test previously identified asthma- or allergy-related genes. Inflammatory cell gene expression will be related to gene sequence variation, environmental exposures, epigenetic phenomena and clinical outcomes. Environmental, genetic and biologic material will be assayed both in real time and stored for later analyses using cohort and nested case-control designs. Multiple investigators from diverse academic disciplines, and scientists from several Federal departments, together with scientific, ethical and legal advisors, are involved in this study. Recruitment has commenced this year, with follow-up to age 5 to be completed in 2014.",5 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=176369&lang=en
176378,Communicating about Nursing Errors (CANE) in Nursing Home Settings,Wagner  Laura M,"Wagner, Laura M",Baycrest Centre for Geriatric Care (Toronto),Ontario,Canada,200809,300000.0,New Investigator Award - Aging,Salary Programs,Health systems / services,Aging,Nursing Homes / Long-Term Care; Patient Safety; Registered Nurses; Survey Design,"The purpose of this study is to examine the current factors influencing nursing error disclosure among nurses (Registered Nurses and Registered Practical Nurses) working in nursing home facilities.  A series of reports on the severity of adverse events and errors have galvanized the Canadian patient safety movement in an effort to reduce the morbidity and mortality associated with them. The reports have forced health care providers to reassess how they evaluate adverse events and errors including how they are disclosed to patients and other stakeholders. The lack of nursing error disclosure has a negative impact on improving safety as it results in repetition of mistakes, reduces learning opportunities, and increases a nurse's fear of being reprimanded. Nursing home residents are especially a vulnerable group to being affected by adverse events and errors due to multiple physical and mental health co-morbidities, and organizational conditions such as high staff turnover, inadequate supervision, poor communication and teamwork, and frequent changes in administration.  Unlike in the acute care setting, the physician is an absent provider in the day-to-day care of residents.  Thus, the obligation to inform residents and families about errors that have occurred in their care often falls on the nurse. Using an anonymous survey design, we will survey licensed nurses (e.g., Registered Nurses, Registered Practical Nurses) in Ontario to examine factors influencing disclosure of nursing errors and how nurses would disclose an error to nursing home residents and their family.  Ultimately these data will be important for us to provide background data targeted at building an interventional study to improve disclosure processes in nursing home settings.",5 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=176378&lang=en
176382,"Prescribing Quality in Long-Term Care Homes: Correlation Between Indicators of Overuse, Underuse and Misuse",Bronskill  Susan E,"Bronskill, Susan E",Institute for Clinical Evaluative Sciences-Toronto,Ontario,Canada,200809,300000.0,New Investigator Award - Aging,Salary Programs,Health systems / services,Health Services and Policy Research,Applied Statistics; Drug Utilization; Health Services Research; Long-Term Care Homes; Provider Profiling; Quality Of Care,"The correct use of drug therapies in residents of long-term care homes (also known as nursing homes) is a challenge. These individuals are frail, have many clinical conditions which require multiple medications, and are treated by a number of different doctors, nurses and aides. All of these factors place nursing home residents at special risk for developing problems related to their drug treatments. This study will compare the prescribing patterns for different kinds of drugs across nursing homes in order to see if facilities with good (or bad) prescribing practices can be identified consistently. The results will be used to determine which drugs should be included in reports to the public on the quality of nursing homes.",5 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=176382&lang=en
176401,"Individual, social and environmental barriers to HIV risk reduction among men who have sex with men and transgendered populations in India",Lorway  Robert R,"Lorway, Robert R","Simon Fraser University (Burnaby, B.C.)",British Columbia,Canada,200809,300000.0,New Investigator Award - PA: HIV/AIDS Services/Population Health Research,Salary Programs,Social / Cultural / Environmental / Population Health,Infection and Immunity,Behaviour Change; Hiv And Aids; Men Who Have Sex With Men; Participatory Research,"In South Asia, men who have sex with men (MSM) are highly vulnerable to HIV infection and because many also have females sexual partners, prevention programs targeting MSM are a critical part of an overall HIV control strategy. However, prevention programs and services for MSM are impeded by social and environmental factors such as stigma and discrimination that inhibit MSM from accessing these services. The objective of this study is to create new knowledge about the individual, social and environmental factors that lead to increased risk among MSM so that programs can be better designed. The study will be conducted in three diverse cities in south India and will involve the MSM community as researchers to gather in-depth information from MSM. Analysis will focus on differences in how MSM interact with each other and with the broader social environment to uncover how these interactions influence HIV risk and vulnerability. The results will be used to inform the MSM community and HIV prevention programs about how to promote behaviour change that will lead to lower HIV risk.",5 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=176401&lang=en
176402,The potential of APOBEC3G in the development of a novel anti-HIV-1 therapeutic.,Cen  Shan,"Cen, Shan",McGill University,Qu&eacute;bec,Canada,200809,60000.0,New Investigator Award - PA: HIV/AIDS Biomedical/Clinical Research,Salary Programs,Biomedical,Infection and Immunity,Aids; Apobec Superfamily; Apobec3g; Assembly; Deaminase; Encapsidation,"APOBEC3G is a host factor that is able to inhibit HIV-1 replication. A HIV-1 protein, so-called Vif, can protect the virus from the attack of APOBEC3G by binding to APOBEC3G and subsequently destroying it. Understanding the mechanism of how Vif protects HIV-1 from the inhibtion by APOBEC3G may lead us to develop a novel therapeutic strategy for HIV-1 infection. The objective of this work is to explore the mechanism by which Vif abolishes anti-HIV activity of APOBEC3G.",1 yr 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=176402&lang=en
176418,The role of TL1A in rheumatoid arthritis,Luo  Hongyu,"Luo, Hongyu",Centre hospitalier de l'Universit&eacute; de Montr&eacute;al (CHUM),Qu&eacute;bec,Canada,200809,100000.0,"Operating Grant - PA: Musculoskeletal Health, Arthritis, Skin and Oral Health",Operating Grants,Biomedical,Musculoskeletal Health and Arthritis,Ab Production; Collagen-Induced Arthritis; Gene Knockout; Local Cytokine Production In Joints; Rheumatoid Arthritis; Tl1a,"TL1A is a molecule that can stimulate T lymphocytes. In our pilot study, we showed that mice injected with this molecule had severer rheumatoid arthritis (RA). This molecule could increase antibody production, which is a RA-causing factor. We further proved that TL1A was produced in human joints. In an attempt to understand how this molecule causes RA, we generated genetically manipulated mice which do not have the TL1A gene.
The objective of this project is to understand how TL1A causes RA.
Hypotheses:
1) Local TL1A production in the joints is a component of a vicious circle in aggravating RA. 
2) In rheumatoid arthritis, TL1A production in lymphoid organs promotes autoantibody production, which is a cause of the disease.

Specific aims
1. To assess whether mice without TL1A gene have reduced severity and penetrance of collagen-induced arthritis (CIA).
2. To study whether a lack of TL1A expression in non-hematopoietic cells would reduce the severity of CIA. 
3. To evaluate whether blocking TL1A activity can ameliorate CIA.
4. To investigate whether a lack of TL1A expression results in reduced IL-17 production in RA joints.
5. To understand how TL1A enhances Ab production and germinal center formation.

Significance
This study will address the question whether TL1A is a novel mediator involved in RA development, and is a possible therapeutic target for the disease.",1 yr 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=176418&lang=en
176420,Glucocorticoid regulation of the catabolic effects of parathyroid hormone in bone,Mitchell  Jane A,"Mitchell, Jane A",University of Toronto,Ontario,Canada,200809,100000.0,"Operating Grant - PA: Musculoskeletal Health, Arthritis, Skin and Oral Health",Operating Grants,Biomedical,Musculoskeletal Health and Arthritis,Beta-Adrenergic Agonists; Bone; Glucocorticoids; Osteoporosis; Parathyroid Hormone; Transcription Factors,"Glucocorticoids are a group of steroid drugs that are used to treat inflammatory conditions such as asthma, arthritis and inflammatory bowel disease.  One of the major side-effects of these drugs is osteoporosis in which the bones become weak and prone to fracture. Research has shown that glucocorticoids alter the response of bone cells to endogenous hormones resulting in less bone deposition and eventual osteoporosis. We have examined the effects of glucocorticoids on osteoblasts, the cells that make bone, and found that they alter the responses to hormones such and parathyroid hormone (PTH). In our current work we will continue to identify the key changes to signaling in osteoblasts and test the effects of these changes in mouse models. By understanding these changes we may be able to find ways to avoid osteoporosis when patients have to take steroid antiinflammatory drugs.",1 yr 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=176420&lang=en
176421,Therapeutic potential of ETA selective antagonist in OA.,Moldovan  Florina F,"Moldovan, Florina F","Centre hospitalier universitaire Sainte-Justine (Montr&eacute;al, Qu&eacute;bec)",Qu&eacute;bec,Canada,200809,94684.0,"Operating Grant - PA: Musculoskeletal Health, Arthritis, Skin and Oral Health",Operating Grants,Biomedical,Musculoskeletal Health and Arthritis,Cell Signalling; Endothelins; Human Cartilage Tissues; Matrix Degradation,"Osteoarthritis (OA) is characterised by progressive joint destruction, inflammation and pain. There are no specific ways to stop OA and, because of its nature, only treatments begun during the early stages of the disease can assure those who live with it daily a higher quality of life. The goal of this project is to better understand specific biological factors involved in the evolution of OA. Of these many factors, our laboratory has identified one key potential target for the development of an effective treatments for the painful, degenerating effects of OA by blocking ETA receptor. This project will increase understanding of the processes that take place in early in osteoarthritic joints and how to control those processes. This project could lead to the development of new medications for osteoarthritis.",1 yr 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=176421&lang=en
176423,Role of a neutral sphingomyelinase as a novel regulator of skeletal mineralization,Murshed  Monzur,"Murshed, Monzur",McGill University,Qu&eacute;bec,Canada,200809,100000.0,"Operating Grant - PA: Musculoskeletal Health, Arthritis, Skin and Oral Health",Operating Grants,Biomedical,Musculoskeletal Health and Arthritis,Bone Histomorphometry; Bone Mineralization; Cell Culture; Osteoblast Differentiation; Transgenic Mouse Models,"Lay Abstract: Bones and teeth are hard tissues, the usual sites for physiologic mineral accumulation. These mineralized tissues protect the internal soft organs, help in locomotion, facilitate food processing and more importantly serve as a reservoir for essential mineral ions required for proper body functions. A poor hard tissue mineralization, as seen in rickets, might cause a serious health concern, while soft tissue mineralization in diseases like osteoarthritis is an undesirable event. The long-term goal of this proposal is to identify novel mechanisms regulating both soft and heard tissue mineralization. Towards this goal, I plan to characterize a mouse model, fro/fro, which shows a severely under-mineralized bones and teeth. Recently, a genetic mutation in this model has been identified. Smpd3, the gene mutated, codes for an enzyme involved in the metabolism of several fat-soluble molecules. I will investigate how Smpd3 function affects bone and tooth cells and if the abnormalities caused by the mutation can be reversed by pharmacological or genetic manipulations in the mutated mouse model. I believe, this work might provide clues to a novel mechanism regulating tissue mineralization. Unveiling such mechanisms should eventually identify new therapeutic targets and improve the management of human pathologic conditions related to bone and tooth mineralization defects.",1 yr 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=176423&lang=en
176425,Bone marrow-derived stem cell-based gene therapy to accelerate fracture healing,Schemitsch  Emil H,"Schemitsch, Emil H",Unity Health Toronto,Ontario,Canada,200809,57839.0,"Operating Grant - PA: Musculoskeletal Health, Arthritis, Skin and Oral Health",Operating Grants,Biomedical,Musculoskeletal Health and Arthritis,Bone Marrow Stem Cell; Cell Based Gene Therapy; Epc Msc; Promote Bone Healing; Rat Fracture; Vegf Enos Genes,"Bone fracture disrupts the circulation around a fracture and leads to acute necrosis and hypoxia of adjacent bone and marrow. Severe fracture may lead to delays in bone healing or nonunion. There are only a limited number of effective treatment options to enhance fracture healing. The present research proposal seeks to develop a novel approach, namely bone marrow cell-based gene therapy to promote fracture healing using bone marrow derived endothelial progenitor cell (EPC) and mesenchymal stem cell (MSC) transfer with genes of vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) and endothelial nitric oxide synthase (eNOS). It is hypothesized that bone marrow cell-based gene transfer without virus vector therapy applied to a fracture, may be effective in stimulating angiogenesis and enhancing new bone formation locally. The transfected cells will be delivered to the animal fracture site. The EPCs and MSCs then function as a factory to produce VEGF and eNOS proteins and the other phenotypic characteristics of the EPCs or MSCs which favor neovascularization or differentiation into osteoblasts are retained. It is hoped that this work will lead to novel and more effective strategies to increase fracture healing and to reduce non-union following fracture.",1 yr 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=176425&lang=en
176435,Role of TGF-beta/Smad signalling during tissue regeneration in axolotls.,Roy  St&eacute;phane M,"Roy, Stéphane M",Universit&eacute; de Montr&eacute;al,Qu&eacute;bec,Canada,200809,100000.0,"Operating Grant - PA: Musculoskeletal Health, Arthritis, Skin and Oral Health",Operating Grants,Biomedical,Musculoskeletal Health and Arthritis,Axolotl (Transgenic); Cytokine Signalling; In Vivo Studies; Molecular Biology; Scarless Wound Healing; Tissue Regeneration (Limb Regeneration),"Regenerative medicine is the new frontier of biomedical sciences that promises to unlock the secrets of how the body generates and repair itself. The ability to regenerate lost of damaged tissues would greatly benefit people suffering from the loss of tissue function such as organ failure, amputation and burn victims. Fortunately for tissue regeneration research, there is a vertebrate model that can perfectly regenerate its tissues following amputation or injury which provides a unique opportunity to unlock the mechanisms of regeneration. Urodele amphibians (e.g. axolotls) are unique among vertebrates in their ability to regenerate tissues. In order to better understand the signals modulating the process of regeneration in urodeles, we have selected to study signalling molecules that are implicated in cell growth, differentiation and wound healing in other non-regenerating vertebrate models. One such family of signalling molecules are members of the transforming growth factor beta (tgf-b) superfamily. Various members from this family, in particular tgf-b1 and its intracellular signalling machinery (Smad 2/3 & 7 and MAPK), have been shown to modulate cellular growth, differentiation and wound healing, all of which are cellular events observed in urodele regeneration. A better understanding of how these organisms can regenerate their tissues may one day lead to novel therapeutic approaches for treating loss of tissue function and organ failure in humans.",1 yr 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=176435&lang=en
176440,Aetiology of chronic pain in the muscles of mastication,Lund  James P,"Lund, James P; Kolta, Arlette",McGill University,Qu&eacute;bec,Canada,200809,100000.0,"Operating Grant - PA: Musculoskeletal Health, Arthritis, Skin and Oral Health",Operating Grants,Biomedical,Musculoskeletal Health and Arthritis,Muscle Spindles; Pain; Temporomandibular Disorders; Trigeminal Sensory System,"Chronic muscle pain conditions are very prevalent in the Canadian population, particularly in women of child-bearing age. We are studying the aetiology and possible treatments for these conditions, using both human and animal models of chronic jaw muscle pain. We have shown that small injections of acidic salt solution into the jaw muscles of rats causes them to turn their head away more frequently when light pressure is applied to the face. This hypersensitivity lasts for more than four weeks, suggesting that the muscles have become painful. We have also shown that some neurons (muscle spindle afferents) that normally signal the length of the muscle and degree of stretch, show abnormal changes in their electrical properties. We believe that these transformed neurons play a key role in this acid-induced muscle pain, and have shown that they could be helping to activate specific pain receptors through an interaction within muscle stretch-sensitive organs. We will now test several hypotheses in new experiments. In human volunteers, we will see if stimulating muscle spindles causes long-lasting muscle pain to increase. In rats, we will see if muscle stretch receptors release chemicals that can cause pain within the muscle. Also, we will see if head withdrawal is prevented by pre-treatment with substances that interfere with communication between the stretch receptors and the pain receptors within the muscle. When these animals are killed, we will take slices of brain so that we can study the properties of muscle spindle sensory neurons kept in an aqueous medium for many hours. We will see if the abnormal changes in electrical properties still occur after treatments that reduce pain. We will also look into the mechanisms underlying these properties, including sensitivity to acid, and try to find ways to prevent the pathological changes.",1 yr 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=176440&lang=en
176454,Pathogenesis of tendinopathy: Clinical and laboratory studies,Miran-Khan  Karim,"Miran-Khan, Karim; Duronio, Vincent",University of British Columbia,British Columbia,Canada,200809,100000.0,"Operating Grant - PA: Musculoskeletal Health, Arthritis, Skin and Oral Health",Operating Grants,Clinical,Musculoskeletal Health and Arthritis,Repetitive Use Injuries; Tendinopathy; Tendon,"Repetitive-use tendon injury (traditionally called 'tendinitis' is a major clinical burden in many Canadian industries. There is only limited understanding of how this condition develops; the term for development of a medical condition is called 'pathogenesis'. If we understand the factors that initiate tendon damage in repetive-use jobs like at checkout counters or in the lumber or fishing industries, we will be in a much better position to develop effective treatments. 

When studying painful, damaged tendon from patients undergoing surgery for long-term tendon pain, we (and others) have found that the blood vessels in the damaged area are very abnormal. There are an excessively large number of small vessels - 'microvessels'. We have shown that these vessels are increasing in number (proliferating) and producing a factor that stimulate futher vessel development. This is called vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF). A commonly-used clinical diagnostic test - ultrasound scanning - has shown that increased tendon vascularity is associated with tendon pain. (But the relationship is not perfect.)

Thus, there is a good reason to investigate whether tendon vessels proliferate during periods of repetitive-use as a result of local VEGF production. This vascular proliferation may have harmful effects on tendon structure and function. If this proves to be the case, it will provide an important new target for treatment. There are already drugs that are used to treat abnormal vessel proliferation in other conditions, so if our hypothesis is proven, progress from research to treatment may be relatively fast.",1 yr 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=176454&lang=en
176456,Resistance to feeding-induced anabolism with immobilization in skeletal muscle proteins in humans,Phillips  Stuart M,"Phillips, Stuart M",McMaster University,Ontario,Canada,200809,66624.0,"Operating Grant - PA: Musculoskeletal Health, Arthritis, Skin and Oral Health",Operating Grants,Biomedical,Musculoskeletal Health and Arthritis,Protein Breakdown; Protein Synthesis; Signalling; Skeletal Muscle; Stable Isotope; Tensegrity,"Many people have broken their leg or arm. After wearing a cast for some 4-8 weeks one would have observed firsthand how our leg or arm are much smaller and 'flabby' after the cast was removed. This is because our muscle loses its tone and is much smaller in size. This process, known as muscle atrophy, means we lose strength and muscle size. In other situations, such as during a prolonged period of bed rest, in which our limbs are not bearing weight and so are 'unloaded' the loss of strength and muscle size can become a much greater problem. The rehabilitation of persons who have been in prolonged bed rest is substantial and very costly. It would be advantageous to lessen and reduce the loss of skeletal muscle in persons who are immobilized due to casting or during periods of bed rest. Regrettably, we are largely ignorant as to the exact reason(s) why our muscles become smaller and lose their strength. Our theory is that during the unloading of our limbs during casting or when we lay in bed for a long time that a signal, or more correctly a lack of a signal, in our muscles triggers a reduction in the rate at which new proteins are made. In general, new proteins are continuously made to replace old damaged proteins. Maintenance of all protein-containing structures in our muscle relies on this constant ongoing replacing of old damaged proteins with new ones. Thus, if we make new proteins at a much slower rate than the olds ones are removed and not replaced; the result is a smaller, weaker protein structure or an atrophied muscle. The nature of the signal during that triggers a reduced rate of manufacture of new proteins during unloading has been elusive. We are proposing to examine this with the hope of providing some valuable information as to how we might best combat the loss of protein in muscle that occurs during casting and other situations of disuse and unloading.",1 yr 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=176456&lang=en
176457,Neuroprosthesis for sitting for individuals with spinal cord injury,Popovic  Milos R,"Popovic, Milos R",Toronto Rehabilitation Institute-UHN,Ontario,Canada,200809,64152.0,"Operating Grant - PA: Musculoskeletal Health, Arthritis, Skin and Oral Health",Operating Grants,Biomedical,Musculoskeletal Health and Arthritis,Functional Electrical Stimulation; Neuroprostheses; Sitting Balance; Sitting Function; Spinal Cord Injury; Trunk Stability,"Sitting instability is a major problem for individuals with spinal cord injury (SCI) affecting their independence and the ability to perform everyday activities. The long-term objective of this project is to develop a system that will artificially contract paralyzed muscles in the trunk using low-level electrical currents to bolster sitting stability in individuals with SCI (i.e., neuroprosthesis for sitting). This would certainly improve the ability of individuals with SCI to perform tasks, such as reaching and wheeling. This system could be used as a stand-alone device, or as an integral part of an existing device (e.g., a wheelchair); the system would allow for a wider range of functional activities beyond that achievable with current assistive technology. To date, our team has acquired a good understanding of how the intact human body controls quiet and perturbed sitting. Based on these findings, we believe that the natural next step would be to attempt the development of a neuroprosthesis to stabilize the trunk during unperturbed sitting. Therefore, the objective of this project is to develop a prototype of a neuroprosthesis for unperturbed sitting, using non-invasive technology, for individuals with SCI. The proposed neuroprosthesis for sitting function is intended to help people with complete and incomplete SCI to achieve higher levels of independence in activities of daily living, as well as increase their self-esteem and self-confidence. We recently carried out similar studies, which resulted in the development of a neuroprostheses for standing and walking for individuals with SCI. We are confident that this project will result in the successful development of the proposed neuroprosthesis for sitting balance.",1 yr 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=176457&lang=en
176477,"Probing the role of dopamine in co-morbid pathological gambling and Parkinson's disease: Behavioural pharmacology, electrophysiology, neuroimaging, and genetics.",Zack  Martin H,"Zack, Martin H; Beninger, Richard J; Kennedy, James L; Kish, Stephen J; Segalowitz, Sidney J",Centre for Addiction and Mental Health (Toronto),Ontario,Canada,200810,0.0,Emerging Team Grant: Co-morbidity of brain disorders &amp; other health problems-LOI,Operating Grants,Biomedical,"Neurosciences, Mental Health and Addiction",Amphetamine; Behavioural Pharmacology; Dopamine Agonist; Electrophysiology; Parkinson'S Disease; Pathological Gambling; Positron Emission Tomography; Pramipexole; Reward Seeking; Risk-Taking,"Dopamine (DA) agonists are very effective medications for Parkinson's disease (PD) but can also trigger pathological gambling (PG) in 7-15% of PD patients (3-5 times the population rate). Risk factors for PG in PD are the same as in the general population: Male gender, younger age, novelty-seeking personality, and family history of addiction (genetics). To date, research on co-occuring PG and PD has been largely correlational - revealing an association but not explaining why it exists. The proposed research team will bring together experts on PG, PD, genetics and animal models of mental illness to investigate, under controlled experimental conditions, how DA agonists affect thoughts, behaviour, brain waves, and DA function itself. There will be 3 parallel research lines: One that uses probes and mental tasks to measure PG-related processes (e.g., risk-taking) in human subjects; one that use PET scans to quantify and localize brain DA activity in the same subjects; and one that isolates, using animal models, the specific brain structures and DA 'receptors' involved in the human-based effects. The human work will assess those with both PD and PG, either PD or PG, and healthy volunteers. By comparing responses across groups and examining how risk factors fo PG (gender, age, personality, genetics) influence individual responses, this research can delineate the specific processes that underlie the association between PD and PG. This may lead to more effective treatments and enable matching of a given patient to the treatment that is best for him or her, improving patient's personal health. By informing early interventions it may decrease the number who escalate to PG, reducing strain on the health care system. Better treatment/prevention may enhance quality of life for caregivers and reduce social harm ( e.g., PG-related theft), improving overall population welfare.",1 yr 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=176477&lang=en
176482,Trajectoire d'appropriation des intervenants communautaires d'une intervention de dépistage rapide du VIH offerte aux hommes ayant des relations sexuelles avec d'autres hommes dans la région de Montréal.,Veillette-Bourbeau  Ludivine,"Veillette-Bourbeau, Ludivine",Universit&eacute; de Montr&eacute;al,Qu&eacute;bec,Canada,200811,17500.0,Master's Award - HIV/AIDS Community-Based Research: General Stream,Studentship Programs,Health systems / services,Infection and Immunity,Analyse D'Implantation; Dépistage Rapide Du Vih; Harsah; Intervention Communautaire; Recherche Communautaire; Vih/Sida,sans objet,1 yr 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=176482&lang=en
176483,The Cedar Project: A comparison of the sexual vulnerabilities of young Aboriginal men and women surviving drug use and sex work in Prince George and Vancouver,Chavoshi  Negar,"Chavoshi, Negar",University of British Columbia,British Columbia,Canada,200811,66000.0,Doctoral Research Award: HIV/AIDS CBR - Aboriginal Stream,Studentship Programs,Social / Cultural / Environmental / Population Health,Indigenous Peoples' Health,Aboriginal Young People; Aids; British Columbia; Drug Use; Hcv; Health; Hiv; Sex Work; Sexually Trasmitted Infections,"My research will be conducted in collaboration with the Cedar Project; an ongoing prospective cohort study involving at-risk Aboriginal young people aged 14-30 who reside in Vancouver and Prince George, British Columbia, who either smoke or inject illicit drugs.  For the PhD program, I propose to utilize time-series analyses to investigate predictors of transitioning to positive Hepatitis C (HCV) status, becoming HIV positive, and barriers to HIV/AIDS treatment access over time among the Cedar cohort. Appropriate time series models will adjust for significant predictors to determine which risk factors are independently associated with HIV seroconversion. The equivalent modeling will be conducted for all participants who seroconverted to HCV. The Cedar Project addresses a paucity of information on sexual vulnerabilities among Aboriginal young people. My study findings will be brought back to the affected Aboriginal communities and federal/provincial authorities including Chief and Councils. Project Partners will have the leading role in developing recommendations for programming and policy to reduce HIV and HCV infection risks. These will be derived from study evidence regarding the determinants of sexual and drug use vulnerabilities to meet the needs of the at-risk Aboriginal young people and their communities. Future studies will deliver meaningful research for the Aboriginal councils who use the findings for general planning of services and evaluating the efficacy of programs. My work for the Cedar Project will contribute to the capacity for Aboriginal service providers to raise awareness, identify needs, advocate for adequate resources, and develop an HIV/AIDS strategy that respects and integrates traditional and cultural values and beliefs of individuals, families and communities with mainstream HIV and HCV prevention and treatment, while taking into account determinants of health vulnerabilities of the cohort.",3 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=176483&lang=en
176505,Migraine and the Visual System: Cortical and Pre-cortical Mechanisms,Wilkinson  Frances E,"Wilkinson, Frances E","York University (Toronto, Ontario)",Ontario,Canada,200809,89979.0,Operating Grant - Priority Announcement: Institute of Gender and Health,Operating Grants,Biomedical,"Neurosciences, Mental Health and Addiction",Imaging; Migraine; Modelling; Perimetry; Psychophysics; Visual System,"Migraine headache affects at least 12% of the adult Canadian population. Despite advances in developing drugs to abort or suppress the headache, progress has been slow in understanding the brain processes that underlie migraine.  This is critical if we are to develop effective pharmacological and non-pharmacological preventive strategies and treatments. Guided by neural network modelling of sensory mechanisms in the normal human brain, we will use behavioural methods to examine the underlying roots of visual hypersensitivity in migraine. The results of these studies will help to localize the site(s) of abnormal sensitivity in the visual pathways of migraineurs. This knowledge will be of direct value to migraine sufferers in terms of helping them to structure their visual environments to reduce aversive visual stimulation, the presence of which may lower their threshold for attacks. In the longer term, the knowledge gained will be important in the development of more targeted pharmaceutical preventive and abortive medications with fewer side effects.",1 yr 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=176505&lang=en
176514,Heat Shock Protein 27 and Estrogen Receptor Beta Modulation for the Maintenance of Vessel Wall Homeostasis,O'Brien  Edward R,"O'Brien, Edward R",University of Ottawa Heart Institute,Ontario,Canada,200809,100000.0,Operating Grant - Priority Announcement: Institute of Gender and Health,Operating Grants,Biomedical,Circulatory and Respiratory Health,Atherosclerosis; Estrogen; Hormone; Receptor; Vascular; Women,"The most common cause of death is a problem with your heart. The most common heart problem that causes death is a heart attack, and this occurs when the arteries that supply oxygen to your heart muscle become blocked. Women have fewer heart attacks than men - at least until after they turn approximately 50 years old, when menopause occurs. Menopause is a natural change in a women's body that is due to a change in the female hormone estrogen. (A hormone is a substance in your blood that acts on your cells in various tissues to keep them healthy and responding to the daily activities in one's life). With menopause, and the lower levels of estrogen in a woman's body, comes an increased risk that a woman will develop heart problems. It is very likely that the lower estrogen levels are in some way related to the increased risk of heart disease in women. However, simply giving women estrogen pills does not seem to correct the problem. Therefore, there is a critical need to better understand how estrogens may protect women from heart disease. 
This study is designed to get more information about a protein (substance in your cells and blood) that appears to protect against the development of the major form of heart disease - ""hardening of the arteries"" or atherosclerosis. This protein is called Heat Shock Protein 27 or HSP27. The O'Brien Laboratory at the University of Ottawa Heart Institute discovered that HSP27 works together with estrogens to have an effect on blood vessels. Therefore, we would like to better understand: 
1)How this protein interacts with cells to reduce uptake of fats (cholesterol) by blood vessels?
2)How does HSP27 in your blood act on blood vessel cells to protect you from developing blockages in your arteries?
3)If the administration of HSP27 to animals can minimize blood vessel disease.
4)How estrogens may control the release of HSP27 from cells so that it can reduce atherosclerosis.",1 yr 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=176514&lang=en
176515,The central role of TGF-beta3 through the Akt pathway in endometrial cancer chemoresistance and cell invasiveness.,Asselin  Eric,"Asselin, Eric",Universit&eacute; du Qu&eacute;bec &agrave; Trois-Rivi&egrave;res,Qu&eacute;bec,Canada,200809,100000.0,Operating Grant - Priority Announcement: Institute of Gender and Health,Operating Grants,Biomedical,Cancer Research,Akt; Chemoresistance; Endometrial Cancer; Human Biopsies; Inhibitors Of Apoptosis Proteins; Tgf-Beta; Xenograft Models,"Endometrial cancer is the leading type of female genital cancer in the Western world and ranks fourth among the most common cancers in women. The balance between survival and apoptotic factors is crucial in determining tumour cell fate (growth vs cell death), especially during chemotherapy and metastasis. Survival and apoptosis are both regulated at the intracellular level and through extra-cellular hormones. However, how these factors interact to regulate chemoresistance and metastasis is unknown. The overall objective of the proposed research program is to examine the role of two putative key players in endometrial carcinoma chemoresistance and invasion/metastasis: Akt and TGF-beta3. Altogether, the current studies should establish the contribution of TGF-beta3 and downstream Akt isoforms in the process of HEC cell invasion/metastasis, using in vitro, ex vivo and in vivo strategies. Ultimately, this should allow us to propose multiple new avenues that could be envisaged for the treatment of chemoresistant and metastatic uterine cancers, the primary cause of cancer death. Moreover, these studies will form the basis for future investigations and provide important clues for the development of novel strategies for the treatment of endometrial cancers.",1 yr 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=176515&lang=en
176516,Role of insulin action and free fatty acids in the hyperandrogenemia of women with polycystic ovary syndrome,Baillargeon  Jean-Patrice,"Baillargeon, Jean-Patrice",Universit&eacute; de Sherbrooke,Qu&eacute;bec,Canada,200809,100000.0,Operating Grant - Priority Announcement: Institute of Gender and Health,Operating Grants,Clinical,"Nutrition, Metabolism and Diabetes",Androgens; Euglycemic-Hyperinsulinemic Clamp; Free Fatty Acids; Insulin Action; Insulin Sensitivity; Polycystic Ovary Syndrome,"The polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS) is a frequent disorder characterized by increased male hormone levels (hyperandrogenemia). We have shown that insulin contributes to hyperandrogenemia even in PCOS women with normal insulin levels and that PPARgamma agonists (a medication) might improve this. Our hypothesis is that women develop PCOS in part because of increased action of insulin on male hormones production. We further propose that this defect might be reversed by PPARgamma agonists (PPARg-a) and induced by some types of fat. Our objectives are (1) to reverse this increased insulin action on male hormones production in PCOS women with a PPARg-a; (2) to induce this increased insulin action on male hormones production in normal female dogs with saturated fat; and (3) to investigate mechanisms involved in fat and PPARg-a effects with cultured cells. AIM 1: We will study 16 normal and 16 PCOS women with normal weight and insulin levels, and 36 obese PCOS women. Glucose tolerance and insulin sensitivity testing will be performed at baseline and repeated in PCOS women after 8-week treatment with medications reducing insulin levels or with rosiglitazone (a PPARg-a). AIM 2: Male hormones will be measured in 20 female dogs exposed to high intravascular fat or saline, plus 10 pre-treated for 8 weeks with rosiglitazone before exposure to fat. AIM 3: Cells producing male hormones will be cultured from the adrenals and the ovaries of these dogs and 20 human adrenals. These cells will be studied for male hormones response to insulin, with or without saturated fat and/or PPARg-a, and for cellular mechanisms of observed alterations. Thus, our program will be the first to assess in details the role of insulin and fat in PCOS hyperandrogenemia, and potential mechanisms. Thus, this proposal will help found new treatments for this frequent and disabling condition, including future researches on the benefits of changing dietary fat content.",1 yr 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=176516&lang=en
176519,Transgenerational Effects of Antenatal Glucocorticoid Treatment: Mechanisms of Programming,Matthews  Stephen G,"Matthews, Stephen G",University of Toronto,Ontario,Canada,200809,100000.0,Operating Grant - Priority Announcement: Institute of Gender and Health,Operating Grants,Biomedical,"Human Development, Child and Youth Health",Antenatal Glucocorticoids; Epigenetics; Hypothalamo-Pituitary-Adrenal Axis; Pregnancy And Development; Preterm Labour; Transgenerational,"Approximately 10% of pregnant women are treated with glucocorticoid (GC) in late gestation, to promote lung maturation in babies at risk of preterm delivery. While GC therapy improves the ability of the baby to breathe, we have shown that such treatment can permanently alter the ability of offspring to mount a hormonal response to stress. These effects are highly sex-specific. Animal studies have shown that changes in the regulation of hormones associated with the stress response results in altered susceptibility to disease in later life, including hypertension and psychological illness. Recently, we have shown that the effects of antenatal GC therapy can pass to the second generation where endocrine effects are even more pronounced than in the first generation. The guinea pig will be used, since extensive brain and neuroendocrine development occurs during fetal life, and this is similar to humans. These studies will establish novel mechanisms (including glucocorticoid-induced changes in gene structure) by which adult endocrine function is 'programmed' by excess glucocorticoid exposure during fetal life. We will also determine the processes involved in transgenerational transmission. This knowledge will allow us to refine therapies, maximizing beneficial actions at the lung, while preventing any detrimental effects in the brain and developing neuroendocrine system, which we have now shown to persist for multiple generations.",1 yr 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=176519&lang=en
176525,Translational studies to test potential therapies for patients with primary biliary cirrhosis,Mason  Andrew L,"Mason, Andrew L",University of Alberta,Alberta,Canada,200809,100000.0,Operating Grant - Priority Announcement: Institute of Gender and Health,Operating Grants,Biomedical,Infection and Immunity,Animal Model Of Autoimmunity; Antiviral Therapy; Autoimmune Biliary Disease; Primary Biliary Cirrhosis; Retrovirus Pathogenesis; Viral Immune Responses,"Patients with primary biliary cirrhosis (PBC) develop progressive bile duct damage and antibodies that recognize mitochondria. However, the cause of the disease is unknown. It is thought that both genetic susceptibility and environment factors, such as infections agents cause PBC. We have recently characterized a novel retrovirus from PBC patients' liver samples that resembles a mouse virus known as mouse mammary tumor virus. While most patients with PBC have evidence of viral infection and respond to combination anti-retroviral therapy, the study of PBC has been hampered by the lack of a good animal model. Recently, a mouse model of autoimmune biliary disease has been reported where the mouse develops progressive biliary damage leading to liver failure. This mouse also has the same immune features that have been found in patients with PBC. We have found that mouse mammary tumor virus is associated with the development of autoimmune biliary disease in these mice. Moreover, the biliary disease is blocked by antiviral therapy. Now we plan to investigate novel therapies in the mouse to see if they work for patients with PBC.",1 yr 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=176525&lang=en
176526,Geographic variation in occupational injury and its correlates among Canadian men and women,Breslin  Curtis F,"Breslin, Curtis F",Institute for Work &amp; Health (Toronto),Ontario,Canada,200809,64158.0,Operating Grant - Priority Announcement: Institute of Gender and Health,Operating Grants,Social / Cultural / Environmental / Population Health,Gender and Health,Gender And Health; Geography; Multi-Level Modelling; Occupational Injury,"Previous research shows the work injury rates differ by province and regions within provinces.  These geographic differences in work injury risk may be related to provincial work safety policies, regional demographics, the region's socioeconomic status and social capital, and the region's labour market characteristics (e.g., industrial mix, unionization rates).  We will use a national survey to describe the work injury risk by province and regions within a province, as well as to identify the correlates of the variability.  We will also determine the degree to which geographic variation in work injury risk differs for men and women.  This project will provide some of the most detailed information on the geographic distribution and correlates of work injury.  This kind of knowledge could, for example, help the work safety prevention system target resources on regional 'hot spots.'",1 yr 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=176526&lang=en
176531,From body to brain: Whole body experiences of female genital cutting,Einstein  Gillian,"Einstein, Gillian",University of Toronto,Ontario,Canada,200809,100000.0,Operating Grant - Priority Announcement: Institute of Gender and Health,Operating Grants,Biomedical,Gender and Health,Female Genital Cutting; Immigrant Populations; Neuropathic Pain; Qualitative Interviews; Referred Sensation; Somali Women,"The traditional practice of Female Genital Cutting/Circumcision/Mutilation/ (FGC) has received a great deal of attention over the years, principally within the reproductive health community.  This research has focused on the health outcomes with respect to pregnancy, delivery, and infections of the reproductive tract, but to date, there have been no studies to understand the effects of FGC beyond the reproductive system and on the whole body. This project is unique in its use of a mixture of research methods to gain an understanding of how the procedure might affect parts of the body other than the reproductive system and hence, the everyday lives of women with FGC.  To do this we will recruit 25-30 Somali women with FGC from the Greater Toronto Area who have Type III FGC described by the WHO as the most extensive form of genital cutting. Participants will be involved in a series of interviews, questionnaires and medical exams. The interview consists of open-ended questions to create conversation about pain, pleasure and other bodily sensations the women experience during their daily lives. A standard pain questionnaire will assess chronic pain, including pain of the region cut, while a psychological questionnaire will ask about mental health. The physical exam will determine the extent of the genital cutting and provide further information about sensory experience. The results of the proposed study will improve the health of immigrant, minority women living in North America by bringing together women's personal accounts of their daily experience with the physical signs of pain and altered sensation. We hope that such a linkage will help shift the focus of women's health research to a broader understanding of women's bodies as a whole as well as provide a deeper understanding of the daily bodily experiences of an underserved population of women.",1 yr 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=176531&lang=en
176537,Neural Correlates of Social and Nonsocial Emotion Processing In Women with Childhood Interpersonal Violence,Lanius  Ruth A,"Lanius, Ruth A",Western University (Ontario),Ontario,Canada,200809,100000.0,Operating Grant - Priority Announcement: Institute of Gender and Health,Operating Grants,Clinical,Gender and Health,Early Life Adversity,"Childhood interpersonal violence can have a profound impact on many aspects of women's lives.  Many women who have experienced childhood interpersonal violence have problems regulating their emotions and often have relational difficulties, including revictimization, domestic violence, and adult sexual and physical assault.  Social emotion processing is therefore particularly relevant to this population.  The psychological and brain abnormalities underlying social emotional experiences related to childhood interpersonal violence remain largely unknown.  The proposed study will examine the changes in brain activation in response to social and nonsocial emotional stimuli in women who have experienced childhood interpersonal violence.  A greater understanding of the brain processes underlying social emotional processing in this population will allow the development of better treatment interventions and help to increase the quality of life of women who have suffered childhood interpersonal violence.",1 yr 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=176537&lang=en
176545,The Early Natural History of Cardiovascular Disease at 4-years Postpartum in Young Women with Varying Degrees of Glucose Intolerance in Pregnancy,Retnakaran  Ravi R,"Retnakaran, Ravi R; Connelly, Philip W; Floras, John S; Hanley, Anthony J; Sermer, Mathew; Zinman, Bernard",Sinai Health System (Toronto),Ontario,Canada,200809,100000.0,Operating Grant - Priority Announcement: Institute of Gender and Health,Operating Grants,Clinical,Gender and Health,Cardiovascular Disease; Endothelial Dysfunction; Gestational Diabetes Mellitus; Glucose Intolerance In Pregnancy; Pre-Diabetes; Women'S Health,"Heart disease and stroke, collectively referred to as cardiovascular disease (CVD), represent the leading cause of death of Canadian women. As such, we need to better understand the factors that cause this disease in women in order to prevent it. One group of young women who are at particularly high risk of ultimately developing CVD later in life are those women that develop diabetes in pregnancy or gestational diabetes mellitus (GDM). As part of an ongoing study, we have recruited a large group of women with and without GDM in pregnancy, who are being followed for several years following the pregnancy. This group of women is being studied over time to identify changes in the body that may lead to diabetes and CVD. In the current application, we wish to study the function of blood vessels in these women at 4 years after their pregnancy, using ultrasound tests of the forearm, since abnormalities in these vessels are known to be an early indicator of future risk of CVD. We will then see if other factors in the body that we are already measuring (such as blood sugar) lead to abnormalities in the blood vessels. Overall, our goal is to identify the factors that cause early abnormalities in blood vessel function, in the hopes of ultimately learning how to prevent the development of CVD in women.",1 yr 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=176545&lang=en
176548,"Does depression pose a risk to placental health during pregnancy? A study of the interactions between neurotransmitters and steroid hormones in human placenta, and the effects of treatment with selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors.",Sanderson  J. Thomas,"Sanderson, J. Thomas; Vaillancourt, Cathy",INRS-Institut Armand-Frappier (Laval),Qu&eacute;bec,Canada,200809,100000.0,Operating Grant - Priority Announcement: Institute of Gender and Health,Operating Grants,Biomedical,"Neurosciences, Mental Health and Addiction",Aromatase; Estrogens; Human Placenta; Pregnancy Depression; Selective Serotonin Reuptake Inhibitors (Ssri); Serotonin,"Major depression occurs in 10-20% of pregnant women and poses a serious threat to the health of both mother and fetus. Contrary to what is said about the mood-elevating effects of pregnancy, up to 75% of depressed women who cease their antidepressant therapy around conception or during pregnancy relapse. Pregnancy is associated with important changes in maternal hormone levels, in particular those of certain sex hormones (estrogens) and neurotransmitters (serotonin), which are known modulators of mood and cognition. It is known that depression is associated with changes in serotonin levels, which act predominantly in the brain. Recently, our research group has discovered that receptors and transporters for serotonin are also found in the human placenta, and that serotonin may even be produced by the placenta. It is not known what its functions are in human placenta, but changes in serotonin levels in the circulating blood of the mother appear to be associated with an increased risk of developing high-risk complications such as preeclampsia (sudden high blood pressure and presence of proteins in maternal urine), intra-uterine growth restriction and pre-term labour, all dangerous to mother and fetus. It is also known that neurotransmitters can affect the production and function of sex hormones, and the concern is that even modest changes in any of these hormone levels adversely affects placental function and, by consequence, the pregnancy and fetal health. This research proposal wishes to study the delicate balance between steroid hormones and serotonin in human placenta, with as ultimate goal to better understand the effects of maternal depression on pregnancy and fetal development, and to decide whether antidepressant therapy would be beneficial or should be avoided.",1 yr 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=176548&lang=en
176550,Reducing the Risk of Posttraumatic Psychopathology in Sexual Assault Survivors: The Role of Intrusive and Deliberate Rumination in Emotional Processing,Stermac  Lana,"Stermac, Lana",University of Toronto,Ontario,Canada,200809,45037.0,Operating Grant - Priority Announcement: Institute of Gender and Health,Operating Grants,Social / Cultural / Environmental / Population Health,Gender and Health,Cognitive Processing Of Traumatic Events; Posttraumatic Growth; Posttraumatic Mental Health; Sexual Assault,"While exceptionally high rates of distress including posttraumatic stress disorder are seen among survivors of sexual assault, there is emerging evidence that individuals experiencing a traumatic event, even one such as sexual assault, can also experience some positive outcomes. These outcomes are sometimes referred to as posttraumatic growth and are associated with a number of personal and social characteristics as well as coping and cognitive processing or appraisal strategies. Research studies have shown that the use of a cognitive processing approach identified as rumination, may be related to experiencing both posttraumatic distress and posttraumatic growth. Our study is designed to explore the role of rumination in mediating the overall relationship between posttraumatic stress and posttraumatic growth in sexual assault survivors as well as to examine some of the cognitive processing strategies associated with reducing post-assault distress. Specifically we focus on two forms of rumination, i.e., intrusive and negative rumination and deliberate and positive rumination and explore their association with posttraumatic mental health outcomes in sexual assault. Our previous clinical work demonstrates that deliberate and positive rumination, clearly differentiated from intrusive and negative rumination, is associated with posttraumatic growth following sexual assault. We aim to demonstrate that skills to implement this form of rumination can be acquired through cognitive behavioural intervention strategies. 
     This research addresses the critically important area of posttraumatic mental health in sexual assault survivors. The high rates and negative personal, social and economic costs of sexual assault are well known. This study aims to identify and examine factors related to reducing risks of posttraumatic psychopathology and improving health care delivery and the personal health of sexual assault survivors.",1 yr 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=176550&lang=en
176559,PPARalpha as a Mediator of Sex Differences in Autoimmunity,Dunn  Shannon E,"Dunn, Shannon E",University Health Network (Toronto),Ontario,Canada,200809,100000.0,Operating Grant - Priority Announcement: Institute of Gender and Health,Operating Grants,Biomedical,Infection and Immunity,Cytokines; Experimental Autoimmune Encephalomyelitis; Peroxisome Proliferator-Activated Receptor Alpha; Sex Differences Autoimmunity; Sex Hormones; T Helper Cells,"Multiple sclerosis (MS) is an autoimmune disease where the individual's own immune system goes awry and mounts attacks on myelin in the brain and spinal cord. Myelin is the protective coating on nerves that enables them to conduct signals from the brain to other parts of the body. When myelin is destroyed, nerve conduction is disrupted, resulting in such symptoms as muscle weakness, blindness, loss of sensation, and cognitive dysfunction. 
      For reasons that are unclear, MS affects women three times more often than men. The goal of our research program is to determine the underlying reasons for sex-based differences in the prevalence of MS. To this end, we conduct studies using the animal model of MS, experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis (EAE). Previous work by our group and others has revealed that sex differences in the development of EAE may relate in part to the ability of male sex hormones (androgens) to dampen the activity of myelin-reactive T cells. Additionally, we have made progress towards identifying the genes that mediate the effects of androgens on the immune response. Our studies have shown that male sex hormones induce the expression of Peroxisome Proliferator-Activated Receptor alpha (PPARalpha) in T cells and that this gene has suppressive effects on the activity of these cells.
      The major objective of our research is to study in more depth the mechanism of how male sex hormones limit the activity of myelin-reactive T cells in EAE and to test the hypothesis that these hormones suppress the activity of T cells by increasing the expression of PPARalpha. This research will provide insights into why females preferentially develop multiple sclerosis. Moreover, elucidation of the molecular mechanism of how male sex hormones dampen the immune response may lead to the discovery of new targets for drug development.",1 yr 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=176559&lang=en
176561,PCSK9 in Cholesterol Homeostasis: The Key Role of Phosphorylation and Hormonal Status,Chretien  Michel,"Chretien, Michel",Ottawa Hospital Research Institute,Ontario,Canada,200809,100000.0,Operating Grant - Priority Announcement: Institute of Gender and Health,Operating Grants,Biomedical,Circulatory and Respiratory Health,Cholesterol; Coronary Arterary Disease; Hormones; Low Density Lipoprotein Receptor; Phosphorylation; Proprotein Convertase 9,"Heart disease is one of the leading causes of death in Canada. One of the best recognized risk factors for heart disease is high levels of low density lipoprotein cholesterol, or bad cholesterol.  Our group is studying an enzyme found in circulation, called PCSK9 that helps to regulate bad cholesterol.  When PCSK9 is very active it can cause cholesterol levels to rise, but when PCSK9 is less active it can decrease cholesterol levels so that individuals are protected from heart disease.  We have recently observed that PCSK9 circulates in several molecular forms.  We want to investigate whether these forms affect PCSK9 activity and therefore cholesterol levels.  The amount of PCSK9 can change in response to hormones such as insulin.  We want to investigate whether insulin can also change the molecular form and activity of PCSK9. We have recently observed that this enzyme, although found in both men and women, may be less active in women.  This finding may contribute to why women are protected from heart disease in comparison to men.  We believe one contributing factor may be the female hormone estrogen.  Other groups have found that this hormone protects women from heart disease through several different means.  We believe that this hormone may affect the action of PCSK9 in women. To find out if these lines of thinking are correct we want to use two different models, human liver cells in culture and mice.  This study will lead to a better understanding of the functioning of PCSK9 in modifying cholesterol levels; it may also suggest new therapeutic approaches for the treatment of high cholesterol.",1 yr 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=176561&lang=en
176566,Investigation into the impact of certain micronutrients on lipid raft structure and associated IGF-IR signaling during prostate cancer progression,Guns  Emma S,"Guns, Emma S",University of British Columbia,British Columbia,Canada,200809,100000.0,Operating Grant - Priority Announcement: Institute of Gender and Health,Operating Grants,Biomedical,Cancer Research,Cell Signaling; Lc - Mass Spectrometry; Lipid Rafts; Micronutrients; Prostate Cancer; Prostate Cancer Progression Models,"Many cellular processes have been shown to be involved in the initiation and progression of prostate cancer. This study investigates the impact of compounds derived from dietary sources of pomegranate, soy, ginseng and tomatoes on these process with a goal of defining the benefit of enriching the diet with specific micronutrients in men with prostate cancer.",1 yr 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=176566&lang=en
176576,Dieldrin increases breast cancer metastasis via dysregulation of neurotrophin expression.,Foster  Warren G,"Foster, Warren G",McMaster University,Ontario,Canada,200809,100000.0,Operating Grant - Priority Announcement: Institute of Gender and Health,Operating Grants,Biomedical,Gender and Health,Apoptosis; Breast Cancer; Invasion; Metastasis; Neurotrophins; Toxicology,"Exposure to biohazardous environmental toxicants is linked with an increased risk for breast cancer. While the biomedical literature supporting this relationship is inconclusive, animal studies and tissue culture experiments provide evidence for the biological plausibility. However, the mechanisms are poorly understood and suitable animal models are limited. To elucidate the mechanisms of environmental toxicants on breast cancer development and metastasis my laboratory uses a unique mouse model of breast cancer. Specifically this mouse model expresses the c-erbB2 gene and mimics many of the features of breast cancer including metastasis. Thus unlike conventional animal models, the model we use allows for testing on a background of risk that we think is more relevant to human health. We have shown that exposure to dieldrin, an estrogenic pesticide that is associated with a significant increased risk for breast cancer and decreased survival, dose dependently increased mammary tumour burden together with expression of Brain Derived Neurotrophic Factor (BDNF) and tyrosine kinase receptor B (Trk B), factors important in cancer cell survival and metastasis. Preliminary studies also reveal that dieldrin dose dependently increased cell invasion and survival as well as BDNF and Trk B expression in two human breast cancer cell lines (invasive and non-invasive). Therefore, we postulate that dieldrin exposure will increase breast cancer metastases via binding with the estrogen receptor and stimulation of BNDF expression and Trk B signalling resulting in increased cell invasion and metastasis. This study will provide insight into the mechanisms underlying the increased risk of breast cancer in women exposed to estrogenic chemicals. Since metastasis is associated with poor prognosis and death our results are expected to influence future testing strategies and regulatory approaches to estrogenic chemicals.",1 yr 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=176576&lang=en
176577,"Antiandrogenic and antiproliferative effects of diindolylmethane (DIM) and ring-substituted analogs (ring-DIMs) in LNCaP and PC-3 human prostate cancer cells in vitro, and in vivo using real-time imaging technology",Sanderson  J. Thomas,"Sanderson, J. Thomas",INRS-Institut Armand-Frappier (Laval),Qu&eacute;bec,Canada,200809,79752.0,Operating Grant - Priority Announcement: Institute of Gender and Health,Operating Grants,Biomedical,Gender and Health,Antiandrogens And Signaling Pathways; Diindolylmethane And Derivatives; Human Prostate; In Vivo Imaging And Reduction Of Animal Use; Lncap And Pc-3 Cell Culture; Steroidogenesis And Enzyme Kinetic Analysis,"Numerous studies have shown the protective effects against cancer of high vegetable consumption, particularly that of cruciferous vegetables of the Brassica family (broccoli, cauliflower, cabbage). These vegetables contain high amounts of indole-3-carbinol (I3C), which is converted in the body to the metabolite diindolylmethane (DIM). DIM is a more potent anti-cancer agent than I3C, and studies have shown that it is effective against a variety of cancers, including that of the prostate. Hormone-dependent prostate tumors grow under the influence of the potent male sex hormone dihydrotestosterone (DHT). Current treatment of these prostate tumors involves drugs that block the action of DHT on the androgen receptor (AR antagonists), or those that prevent the synthesis of DHT by inhibiting the enzyme steroid 5-alpha-reductase (SRD5A inhibitors). DIM acts as an AR antagonists and this is thought to be one possible way in which it inhibits prostate cancer growth. Preliminary results using cancer cell lines (in vitro) suggest that a group of synthetic derivatives of DIM, called ring-DIMs, have more potent anticancer properties than DIM. Furthermore, these ring-DIMs appear to be effective against hormone-dependent as well as -independent prostate cancer cells. This suggests that they are excellent candidates for detailed studies of their mode of anti-prostate cancer action and biological effectiveness in vivo. The present research proposal wishes to determine whether ring-DIMs are effective in vivo by testing their anticancer activity in mice that carry bioluminescent human prostate tumor cells (xenografts). These cells produce light, allowing for location and growth of the tumor to be easily monitored using an imager, without the need to sacrifice the animals periodically to assess tumor progression. Experiments using prostate cancer cell lines in culture will assess various mechanisms of anticancer action to better understand how ring-DIMs work in tumor cells.",1 yr 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=176577&lang=en
176599,"Quantifying, characterizing and modeling the whole-body mobility of individuals in their natural environment; from normal aging to Parkinson's disease",Duval  Christian,"Duval, Christian; Boissy, Patrick; Edwards, Roderick; Frank, James S; Jog, Mandar S; Speechley, Mark",Universit&eacute; du Qu&eacute;bec &agrave; Montr&eacute;al,Qu&eacute;bec,Canada,200811,10000.0,Emerging Team Grant: Alliances in Mobility in Aging - LOI,Operating Grants,Clinical,Aging,Aging; Home Monitoring; Mobility; Modeling; Parkinson; Signal Analysis,"Several clinical and experimental measures have been developed to quantify and characterize the mobility of elders, as well as to assess the mobility of persons with neurological disorders such as Parkinson's disease (PD). However, these evaluation methods must be done with the presence of an observer, and under highly standardized, strict clinical or experimental situations. Finally, optimal performance is generally required of subjects, which is not a parameter of importance for daily motor activities of seniors, given that energy conservation is typically their goal. Accordingly, the motor acts performed under these tests do not provide an accurate representation of everyday life mobility. To understand the changes in mobility that occurs with normal aging, or with disease of the central nervous system, we must quantify, characterize and model movements in the natural environment, e.g., in and around the home. Here, we will record whole-body 3D movement during an extended period of time (hours) with a newly-developed highly portable, light-weight camera-free system that can provide 3D body rendering in the natural environment. We will develop the mathematical means to assess the quantity of movement, characterize and model that movement, identify key features of mobility to improve quantitative assessment of movement, and finally correlate our results with those obtained by clinical scales of mobility. Using the model developed in healthy elderly individuals, we will attempt to predict the changes of mobility with age and disease. One ultimate goal is to better identify barriers to mobility within a person's home and find characteristics to predict ""adverse events"" (e.g., falls) that may jeopardize the health of elderly individuals or persons suffering from neurological ailments.",1 yr 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=176599&lang=en
176601,Gait and Cognition as Gateways to Understanding Mobility in Aging,Petrella  Robert J,"Petrella, Robert J; Frank, James S; Montero Odasso, Manuel M",London Health Sciences Centre Res. Inc. (Ont.),Ontario,Canada,200811,0.0,Emerging Team Grant: Alliances in Mobility in Aging - LOI,Operating Grants,Biomedical,Aging,Cardiovascular And Musculoskeletal Risk; Cognitive Impairment; Continuum Of Care; Early Identification; Gait; Therapeutic Interventions,"Gait is routinely examined in clinical practice to assess health and function of older adults.  Abnormal gait has been associated with greater risk for adverse outcomes in older adults such as immobility, falls and dementia which, in turn, lead to a loss of functional independence and death.  Abnormal gait and memory impairment often occur together in older adults.  The presence of both mobility and cognitive impairment in older individuals have been attributed to specific brain networks affected by selected diseases that accompany but may not necessarily caused by aging. Despite the growing evidence of the concurrence of these two age-related causes of disability, there is a significant gap in knowledge and care regarding mechanisms, measurement and targeted treatments. We propose the creation of a new emerging team to research mobility and cognition in aging.  Our focus will be the relationship between gait and cognition in older adults along the continuum from early risk when interventions are most effective to the presence of overt disease when appropriate management strategies are needed.  Our multidisciplinary approach will yield novel insights into mobility and cognition decline and thus contribute to programs of prevention, management, and rehabilitation of mobility impairment in older adults.",1 yr 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=176601&lang=en
176602,"Evaluating the cause and prevention of ""real life"" falls in the residential care environment.",Robinovitch  Stephen N,"Robinovitch, Stephen N","Simon Fraser University (Burnaby, B.C.)",British Columbia,Canada,200811,10000.0,Emerging Team Grant: Alliances in Mobility in Aging - LOI,Operating Grants,,,Accelerometers; Balance; Biomedical Engineering; Compliant Flooring; Environmental Hazards; Exercise Programs; Fall Prevention; Falls; Hip Fracture; Hip Protectors; Injury Biomechanics; Interventions; Mobility; Mobility Aids; Older Adults; Pharmacueticals; Video Capture; Wearable Sensors,"The primary goal of this team grant is to create a novel program of collaborative research between universities, government agencies, and end users, for the development of innovative technologies to prevent falls and fall-related injuries in older 
adults. Our efforts involve an integrated set of research and demonstration projects in long-term care and assisted living facilities. Collectively, our projects address two fundamental barriers to the prevention of fall injuries in older adults: (1) the need to develop technologies (such as wearable sensors and 
video-based networks) for reliably detecting falls, and providing objective, real-time data on the cause and circumstances of these events; and (2) the need to develop, implement, and evaluate novel technologies (such as compliant flooring and active wearable hip protectors) for reducing the risk for injury in the event of a fall.",1 yr 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=176602&lang=en
176603,"Preventative Treatment and Management Tools and Applications for Balance and Mobility in Older Adults: Development of Primary and Secondary Care, Outcomes and Registry Containing Knowledge-based Expert System.",Szturm  Tony J,"Szturm, Tony J; Kazem-Moussavi, Zahra M; Marotta, Jonathan J; Shay, Barbara L; Van Ineveld, Cornelia",University of Manitoba,Manitoba,Canada,200811,10000.0,Emerging Team Grant: Alliances in Mobility in Aging - LOI,Operating Grants,,,Aging; Automated Computer Tracking; Balance; Community; Neuromusculoskeletal; Older Adults; Translational,"Many of the common diseases that affect older adults such as osteoarthritis, visual impairment and stroke compromise mobility. Adaptation to these deficits will occur amongst those who maintain a certain level of activity. It is very important that older adults participate in instrumental activities of daily living (iADL) and regular physical activity, in order to maintain functional independence and age healthily.Our proposed and emerging research will provide the basis for an innovative exercise regime allowing interventions with embedded outcome measures to help older adults maintain or restore safe, independent outdoor mobility. The proposed screening, tele-gaming and tele-monitoring tools, systems and applications have been motivated by the need to extend long-term rehabilitation services and health care to the community and home settings via telerehabilitation. The premise underlying this work is that people who are active in their own care and who interact with a prepared, informed, proactive health care team will likely improve and sustain function and be productive in the long term. Principal outcomes of this work are to establish:  a) eHealth tools for treatment and objective assessment of balance and mobility behaviors and b) secure, objective and verifiable rehabilitation PORTAL and a knowledge-based expert system.",1 yr 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=176603&lang=en
176617,Mechanisms of Interferon gamma regulation of intestinal epithelial barrier permeability,Smyth  David C,"Smyth, David C",University of Calgary,Alberta,Canada,200810,60000.0,CAG/CIHR Fellowship for Research in Gastroenterology/Nutrition,Fellowship Programs,Biomedical,"Nutrition, Metabolism and Diabetes",Cytokine; Gastrointestinal Health; Inflammation; Molecular Biology; Signal Transduction,"The barrier function performed by the epithelial cells that line the gut is important for the maintenance of an individual's health.  This barrier is regulated to prevent the entry of the vast array of bacteria that live in the human colon from entering the tissue; a breach of the barrier by the bacteria would evoke local inflammation, and if they move into the bloodstream the result can be sepsis and multi-organ failure.  Interferon gamma (IFNg) is an important immune cell-derived factor that helps activate the immune response to combat bacterial and viral infections.  However, IFNg has also been shown to disrupt epithelial barrier function, and in this context it could induce harmful responses and contribute to the initiation of inflammatory disease, such as inflammatory bowel disease (IBD). 
This research proposal aims to determine whether IFNg evokes increases in epithelial permeability by activating a specific signal in the epithelial cell, namely phosphoinositide 3-kinase (PI3K).  By understanding the molecular signaling basis of the impact of IFNg on epithelial barrier function (i.e. PI3K and associated factors) I aim to identify specific means to prevent the epithelial barrier disruption elicited by IFNg.  Therefore, this research will provide novel insights into the mechanism(s) of IFNg control of epithelial barrier function.  Ultimately the data obtained can be translated into new treatments for gut diseases characterized by increased epithelial permeability in which IFNg has been identified as a participant.  In a broader context, this information may be of value in treating other idiopathic gut disease, where barrier function is once again perturbed.",2 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=176617&lang=en
176618,Wheeled Mobility for Older Adults Team (WheeMOAT),Miller  William C,"Miller, William C; Birch, Gary E; Demers, Louise; Kirby, Ronald L; Little, James J; Mackworth, Alan K; Mitchell, Ian M; Oishi, Meeko; Sawatzky, Bonita J",University of British Columbia,British Columbia,Canada,200811,10000.0,Emerging Team Grant: Alliances in Mobility in Aging - LOI,Operating Grants,Clinical,Aging,Aging; Device Development; Measurement; Rehabilitation Interventions; Wheeled Mobility,"Wheeled mobility or more specifically wheelchair use by older adults is expected to grow over the next 50 years. The goal of this interdisciplinary team is to develop a program of research dedicated to improving the wheeled mobility of older Canadians who no longer have the ability to walk safely. Our team consists of engineers, computer scientists, biomechanists and clinical researchers from across Canada. We will create 3 streams of related research focus: 1) the Device Improvement and Development stream will be responsible for leading innovation related to new technologies and intervention strategies designed to improve wheeled mobility; 2) the Measurement stream will be charged with the development and assessment of the utility of novel new measurement tools which will enable us to determine the impact of new devices and intervention strategies; and 3) the Clinical Trial and Evaluation Stream which will assess the effectiveness and efficacy of the new devices.",1 yr 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=176618&lang=en
176624,CIHR team in developmental toxicology,Wells  Peter G,"Wells, Peter G",University of Toronto,Ontario,Canada,200811,10000.0,Team Grant: Environment and Reproductive Health (LOI),Operating Grants,Biomedical,"Human Development, Child and Youth Health",Developmental Toxicology; Endocrine Disruptors; Environmental Contaminants; Epigenetics; Genetics; Oxidative Stress,"Environmental contaminants like methylmercury and arsenic can profoundly affect the developing embryo and fetus, resulting in death, structural birth defects and functional postnatal consequences including cognitive deficits and cancer.  Emerging evidence implicates adverse developmental effects for many additional contaminants like bisphenol A and rotenone, while perhaps most contaminants, exemplified by polyfluorinated compounds and triclocarban, have not been tested.  The current screening methods are limited and relatively insensitive, and we have little or no understanding about the full nature of the problem, let alone how such effects are caused or which children are most susceptible.  Using the above model contaminants, this team will establish a multidisciplinary approach for comprehensively and sensitively determining the full developmental impact and underlying molecular mechanisms, and for translating these insights into solutions for minimizing the health problems of environmental contaminants.  Team members span the disciplines of environmental chemistry, molecular genetics, developmental biology and toxicology. The molecular approaches will cover both genetic and epigenetic processes encompassing the broadest range of mechanisms mediated by receptors, as with estrogen disruptors, and by oxidative stress.  The products arising from this research will include the development of new biomarkers for more sensitively detecting potential developmental toxicity, new screening models, new therapeutic strategies for reducing risk, focused training for scientists and public health professionals and a process for translating this knowledge into improving our public health and regulatory approaches.",1 yr 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=176624&lang=en
176625,Integrated service platform for assessment of emerging environmental reprotoxins: PINE team (Plateforme INtegrative en Environnement),Takser  Larissa,"Takser, Larissa; Boissonneault, Guylain; Devine, Patrick; Pasquier, Jean Charles",Universit&eacute; de Sherbrooke,Qu&eacute;bec,Canada,200811,8439.0,Team Grant: Environment and Reproductive Health (LOI),Operating Grants,Social / Cultural / Environmental / Population Health,"Human Development, Child and Youth Health",Developmental Models; Environmental Exposure; Integrative Approach; Low Dose Exposure; Pregnancy; Reproductive Effects,"Traditional approaches to environmental toxicology do not provide data in a timely manner to inform decision makers on toxic effects of new substances. That is crucial for especially sensitive part of population - pregnant women and children. To accelerate data accumulation on toxic effects of emerging environmental contaminants we will develop a platform bridging experimental toxicology and human epidemiology. In collaboration with Health Canada we will: (i) identify new environmental contaminants of Public Health concern; (ii) test them in two animal developmental models simulating exposure of human population; (iii) apply the obtained data to epidemiological survey; and (iv) inform the scientific community and regulatory organisations. Integrative platform will be developed in process of studying of three brominated flame retardants (BFRs) as examples: pentabrominated diphenyl ethers; decabrominated diphenyl ethers, and tetrabromobysphenol A. BFRs are used as fire-resistant additives in polymers. The breast milk of Canadian women contains the second-highest brominated diphenyl ethers levels, according to a new survey by Health Canada. Concentrations of TBBPA - the most widely used brominated flame retardant in the world - are rapidly increasing in human samples. As a result we anticipate obtaining platform (expert team, developed integrative protocols and methods, databases, bank of human samples, and equipment) suitable for rapid testing of developmental reproductive effects of emerging environmental substances. The expected platform will be crucial to help Canadian decision makers to control persistent contaminants of Public Health concern and adequately protect the future generations from environmentally induced hazards.",1 yr 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=176625&lang=en
176629,"Impact of exposure to phthalates, their metabolites and ""green"" plasticizers on male reproductive health",Robaire  Bernard,"Robaire, Bernard",McGill University,Qu&eacute;bec,Canada,200811,10000.0,Team Grant: Environment and Reproductive Health (LOI),Operating Grants,Social / Cultural / Environmental / Population Health,"Human Development, Child and Youth Health",Leydig Cells; Male Reproductive Health; Phthalate; Plasticizer; Testic Cancer; Testis Function,"The goal of this research proposal is to elucidate the targets of phthalates and their metabolites in cells in the developing and adult testis, to determine the effects of possible replacement plasticizers (""green"" plasticizers) on these targets, and to determine the impact of exposure to environmentally relevant concentrations on human male reproductive health.",1 yr 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=176629&lang=en
176630,CIHR/Health Canada Team Grant on the Effects of Brominated Flame Retardants on Reproductive Health,Goodyer  Cynthia G,"Goodyer, Cynthia G; Hales, Barbara F",Research Institute of the McGill University Health Centre,Qu&eacute;bec,Canada,200811,10000.0,Team Grant: Environment and Reproductive Health (LOI),Operating Grants,,,Brominated Flame Retardants; Cryptorchidism; Environmental Contaminants; Fertility; Fetal And Postnatal Exposure; Reproductive Systems,"During the past thirty years, brominated flame retardants (BFRs) have been used worldwide as fire retardant chemicals in a wide variety of consumer products (textiles, foam furniture, electrical equipment and electronics). Unfortunately, the BFRs leach out of these products: at present, greater than 80% of human exposure to the BFRs is due to contaminated dust in our immediate living spaces (home, car, workplace) with the remainder from food. As a result of increasing exposure, BFR levels in North Americans (serum, tissues) are some of the highest in the world. Of particular concern is the fact that newborns and young infants have the highest serum levels, since it is generally believed that infants are more vulnerable to toxicological insults. Animal studies of BFR exposure have demonstrated interference with male as well as female reproductive organ development and function. Limited clinical studies suggest an association with abnormal male reproductive development (cryptorchidism in newborns, lower sperm levels in young adults). These data suggest that the BFRs are impacting early stages of human development and that at least one outcome is abnormal male reproduction. 
This is a serious issue: not only is an individual's health potentially at risk but that of future generations. There is a clear need for additional data, to address the concerns of Canadians about the use of BFRs and to provide the information that is essential for policy makers and regulators. Our multidisciplinary team of expert clinical and basic scientists from five Canadian universities in partnership with Health Canada will address these concerns. Our goals are: 1) to elucidate the impact of BFR exposure during pregnancy and postnatally on human reproduction; 2) to use animal models to mimic human BFR exposures and investigate the effects on development and reproduction; and 3) to explore the ethical, legal and social issues raised by the results.",1 yr 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=176630&lang=en
176634,Assessing The Effects Of Contaminated Ecosystems On Reproductive Functions In Men.,Cyr  Daniel G,"Cyr, Daniel G","INRS - (Qu&eacute;bec, QC)",Qu&eacute;bec,Canada,200811,0.0,Team Grant: Environment and Reproductive Health (LOI),Operating Grants,Biomedical,"Human Development, Child and Youth Health",Endocrine Disruptors; Epidemiology; Gene Expression; Human Exposure; Male Reproductive Health; Municipal Wastewater,"Canadians are constantly exposed to a variety of environmental contaminants, many of which can act as endocrine-disrupting chemicals. These chemicals interfere with normal, hormonally regulated biological processes to adversely affect development and reproductive functions in wildlife and have potential adverse effects in humans. Humans are exposed to such chemicals via the diet, drinking water, recreational activities in water and the consumption of fish from sport fisheries. Several studies have demonstrated that primary sewage wastewater effluents contain elevated levels of estrogenic substances and pharmaceutical by-products. Male fish exposed in situ show signs of feminization and reproductive impairment. Chemicals in wastewater effluent not only affect aquatic organisms that live in the receiving ecosystem but can be measured at low levels in drinking water and in the fish that are consumed from these ecosystems.  Yet the impact of these chemicals to human health remains largely unknown for urban dwellers. Establishing whether or not endocrine disrupting chemicals can affect human reproductive health and if chemicals impact human health is essential for human reproductive toxicology.  Establishing a protocol to address this issue will not only establish effects but will also allow development of appropriate intervention strategies that may help reducing the health risks of the population. Studying the impact of endocrine disruptors may also provide an opportunity to develop a standard approach that could be applied to assess effects in different high priority areas.",1 yr 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=176634&lang=en
176635,Urban air particulate pollution and genetic instability,Foster  Warren G,"Foster, Warren G",McMaster University,Ontario,Canada,200811,10000.0,Team Grant: Environment and Reproductive Health (LOI),Operating Grants,Biomedical,"Human Development, Child and Youth Health",Air Pollution; Epigenetics; Mutation; Particulates; Spermatogenesis; Toxicology,"We have shown that exposure to particulate air pollution in an urban/industrial area in Hamilton ON, results in mouse sperm mutations at tandemly repeated DNA sequences that were transmitted to offspring, alongside epigenetic modification of the paternal genome. However, the effects of exposure on the developing gonad and unexposed descendents are unknown, and the consequences to human health are unexplored. We hypothesize that exposure of spermatogonial stem cells will lead to transgenerational genomic instability and decreased reproductive fitness. We will examine transgenerational genomic instability with a multi-generational mouse experiment involving ambient particulate air pollution exposures and will follow with an examination of pollution effects on human reproductive fitness. To address our hypothesis we have designed 3 integrated projects and assembled a team of internationally recognized experts that will provide trainees with a rich learning environment.",1 yr 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=176635&lang=en
176636,Maternal-Infant Research on Environmental Contaminants: Perinatal Health Impact (MIREC-PHI).,Fraser  William D,"Fraser, William D; Arbuckle, Tye E; Ettinger, Adrienne S; Foster, Warren G; Julien, Pierre; Monnier, Patricia O","Centre hospitalier universitaire Sainte-Justine (Montr&eacute;al, Qu&eacute;bec)",Qu&eacute;bec,Canada,200811,10000.0,Team Grant: Environment and Reproductive Health (LOI),Operating Grants,Clinical,"Human Development, Child and Youth Health",Endocrine Disruptors.; Environmental Contaminants; Gestational Diabetes.; Intra-Uterine Growth Restriction; Oxidative Stress; Pregnancy Cohort Study; Preterm Birth; Thyroid And Steroid Hormones Assessment,"The consequences of prenatal exposures to environmental contaminants (ECs) has become a key public policy issue, particularly given studies showing deleterious effects at levels considered low and experienced by general populations. MIREC-PHI (Maternal-Infant Research on Environmental Contaminants-Perinatal Health Impact) study will take advantage of the ongoing MIREC national pregnancy cohort to address these issues. The goal of MIREC-PHI is to examine the relationships between prenatal exposures to a range of environmental chemicals and important adverse pregnancy outcomes such as preterm birth, gestational diabetes and low birth weight. Two key potential pathways that may explain the adverse health impact of ECs will be also evaluated: hormonal effects and oxidative stress. Knowledge generated in this program will allow policy makers to formulate sound strategies to reduce potentially harmful exposures to mothers and babies.",1 yr 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=176636&lang=en
176637,A Drug User Led Educational Program Targeting Unsafe Injecting,Callon  Cody,"Callon, Cody",University of British Columbia,British Columbia,Canada,200811,17500.0,Master's Award - HIV/AIDS Community-Based Research: General Stream,Studentship Programs,Social / Cultural / Environmental / Population Health,Population and Public Health,Addiction Services; Community Work; Hiv Prevention; Injection Drug Use; Quantitative Methods,Not Applicable,1 yr 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=176637&lang=en
176639,A CBR Approach to Enhancing Toronto HIV Prevention Services for Newcomer Youth,Salehi  Roxana,"Salehi, Roxana",Canadian AIDS Society (Ottawa),Ontario,Canada,200811,44000.0,Doctoral Research Award: HIV/AIDS CBR Program - General Stream,Studentship Programs,Health systems / services,Infection and Immunity,Community Based Research; Hiv/Aids; Immigration; Social Justice; Youth,"The early teen years are the period where first sexual encounters occur and risk for HIV emerges. Current HIV prevention services have been deficient given the increasing rates of STIs among youth, coupled with an alarming decrease in their knowledge of HIV/AIDS. Newcomer youth¿immigrants, refugees, or ¿non status¿ youth who have lived in Canada for 5 years or less¿are some of the fastest-growing populations affected by HIV/AIDS in Ontario.  We know very little about their unique health needs. 
To fill this gap, my PhD work explores the accessibility and effectiveness of Toronto HIV/AIDS prevention services for newcomer youth age 13-19 as a basis for reducing the existing racial and ethnic disparities in health outcomes. My work is nested within a community-based project called Toronto Teen Survey. My focus within the larger project is specifically on newcomer youth. 
Many newcomer youth encounter immigration-related factors that can put them at risk of marginalization, including poverty, and cultural/ linguistic barriers to accessing services. Thus, effective HIV preventive services should be sensitive to the unique vulnerabilities of this group. ¿Newcomers¿, however, are not a homogeneous group. Individual and interpersonal differences, such as gender, race, substance use or family dynamics, differentially expose youth to HIV transmission. Traditional HIV/AIDS research has paid inadequate attention to i) larger structural factors, such as racism or sexism, that affect HIV risk, and ii) to the variations in sex, gender, and sexual orientation that represent lived experiences of youth. I will work towards compiling a theoretical model that explores diversity and the larger social context.
I will use both survey and focus group data to generate theories and disseminate practical knowledge for enhanced programming and service delivery. 
This work should create better HIV prevention programs and contribute to the global movement to eliminate HIV/AIDS.",2 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=176639&lang=en
176657,"Health Care, Technology and Place (HCTP): A CIHR Strategic Training Initiative",Coyte  Peter C,"Coyte, Peter C",University of Toronto,Ontario,Canada,200811,1915970.0,Training Grant,Operating Grants,Health systems / services,Health Services and Policy Research,Critical Health Research; Health Care; Health Services Research; Place; Technology; Technology Assessment,"The Health Care, Technology & Place (HCTP) Program is the only graduate training program that tries to understand 21st century health care by examining the way that technologies, societies & space interact. HCTP provides an integrated, collaborative & interdisciplinary approach to research training. In its first 6 years, HCTP1 generated a group of scholars who built research capacity through scholarship that links many academic disciplines & examines the complex linkages between people, places, technologies & work in modern health care. 

While HCTP1 focused on the setting (or places) where health care is sought, delivered or received, HCTP2 looks also at technology since increasingly, people who participate in care (patients, providers) & the technologies they use can be separated in space or time. In looking at technologies, HCTP continues to examine the people, places & work practices through which technologies are produced, understood, & have their effects. Also, HCTP2 works to encourage a broader approach to the highly practical & policy relevant domain of health technology assessment (HTA) in order to capture the wide-ranging & context-specific features of technologies in health systems & everyday life.

While funded in the first wave of CIHR training programs, HCTP has evolved. This application offers evidence of innovation & progress as: HCTP2 has the same name but an enhanced emphasis on the technological mediation of care; new mentors add disciplinary depth & complementary & distinguished records to the HCTP1 mentor team; the HCTP2 curriculum structure involves innovations in design & content to ensure greater integration & core shared content; knowledge translation across disciplines is augmented by knowledge transfer & exchange (KTE) with the fields of practice & policy; & research training has been transformed & supplemented through research placement opportunities with decision maker organizations at the local, national & international levels.",6 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=176657&lang=en
176678,"Stress biomarkers, function and frailty in three elderly populations: a pilot study in Brazil, Cameroon and Canada",Zunzunegui  Maria-Victoria,"Zunzunegui, Maria-Victoria",Centre hospitalier de l'Universit&eacute; de Montr&eacute;al (CHUM),Qu&eacute;bec,Canada,200810,74527.0,Catalyst Grant: Population and Public Health,Operating Grants,Social / Cultural / Environmental / Population Health,Population and Public Health,Aging; Frailty; Gender; Physical Function; Pilot Study; Stress,"This pilot study is to prepare field work for a population study on elderly people living in  Quebec (Canada), Santa Cruz (Brazil) and Bandjoon (Cameroon), to assess the effects of social stress on function and frailty and to examine if pathways of stress are different in women and men living in three scenarios: Brazil, Cameroon and Canada . These three geographical settings differ in multiple aspects. Regarding life expectancy, Canadian populations have a life expectancy of 82 for women and 77 for men, 10 years more than their Brazilians counterparts (72 yrs for women and 64 yrs for men); and more than 30 years than the African population (47 yrs for women and 45 for men). The knowledge generated by this international research will address why women face increase likelihood of disability and frailty as they age while men have higher probability of dying from less disabling and more lethal conditions.  
The overall aim of this pilot study is to assess feasibility and to prepare the three research teams for the conduct of the main population study. This pilot study, therefore, will include development of protocols and manual of procedures for measurement of biological samples and physical measures and assessments of validity and reliability of the measurement tools . A total of 192 subjects, 64 subjects at each site, will participate in this research. We will ask them to answer to questions on living conditions, self-reported health and physical function and we will take their anthropometric measures, blood pressure, physical and cognitive function measures, additional frailty markers and salivary cortisol. Reliability and agreement between self-reported and objective measures of function will be assessed.  The pilot study will strengthen the collaboration among research teams and local communities to facilitate knowledge transfer of research results. Graduate students and post-doctoral fellows will be involved at all stages of the project.",1 yr 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=176678&lang=en
176680,Developing public health prevention programs:  a collaboration between Colombia and Canada to address the spread of HIV and STI,Wylie  John L,"Wylie, John L","Universidad de Antioquia (Medellin, Colombia)",Manitoba,Colombia,200810,47429.0,Catalyst Grant: Population and Public Health,Operating Grants,Social / Cultural / Environmental / Population Health,Population and Public Health,Community-Based Study; Hiv Point-Of-Care Testing; Knowledge Translation Evaluation; Populations Vulnerable To Hiv,"HIV continues to spread in many parts of the world and many infected people still do not know they are infected.  The development of fast, simple point-of-care tests designed for the diagnosis of HIV outside of laboratories and clinics provides an opportunity to take testing directly to vulnerable populations in a field setting and improve their access to testing.  This project is designed to test the feasibility of using HIV point-of-care testing in a field setting.  The project is also designed to help build a collaboration between researchers in Canada and Colombia.  We will test the feasibility of using HIV point-of-care testing for commercial sex workers in an urban setting and for aboriginal people living in small rural communities. The study will take place in or near Medellin, Colombia.",1 yr 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=176680&lang=en
176683,Exploring Hypotheses Linking Type II Diabetes and Neighbourhood Environments,Ross  Nancy,"Ross, Nancy; Dasgupta, Kaberi",McGill University,Qu&eacute;bec,Canada,200810,59558.0,Catalyst Grant: Population and Public Health,Operating Grants,Social / Cultural / Environmental / Population Health,Population and Public Health,Built Enviornment And Obesity; Environmental Determinants Of Risk; Geographic Information Systems; National Population Health Survey; Obesity And Chronic Disease; Walking Behaviour,"The speed of the rise in obesity suggests that rather than a shift in the genetic composition of the population, the roots of the obesity pandemic in countries like Canada are environments that support obesity (Egger and Swinburn, 1997; Hill and Peters, 1998; Poston and Foreyt, 1999). Local environments may be particularly important with respect to opportunities for physical activity (e.g. sidewalks, parks, walking-accessible services). Using a national longitudinal data set, we propose to examine the impact of two key constructs of local environments (deprivation, walkability) on weight trajectories of those with and those without incident T2D. Finally, using data from a smaller Montreal-based type 2 diabetes cohort, we will examine neighbourhood environments in more detail using in-field measurements and assess the association between local environmental attributes and walking behaviour in those clinically-diagnosed with type 2 diabetes. Results of our research are intended to provide an evidence base that can inform policies to promote the creation of walkable neighbourhoods and the prevention of chronic disease.",1 yr 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=176683&lang=en
176684,Facilitating Older Persons' Access to Community Support Services: A Case Study of Primary Care and Primary Health Care Models,Ploeg  Jenny,"Ploeg, Jenny; Denton, Margaret",McMaster University,Ontario,Canada,200810,75000.0,Catalyst Grant: Population and Public Health,Operating Grants,Health systems / services,Aging,Access To Community Support Services; Older Adults; Primary Care And Primary Health Care Providers; Qualitative Multiple-Case Study,"Community support services (CSSs) are delivered in the home to help older adults sustain independent living.  Our previous research showed that older adults know relatively little about available CSSs and that they often identify their physician and other professionals working in their physician's office as sources of help and information about such services.  Research suggests that many physicians have inadequate knowledge of and underuse CSSs.  Within Ontario, there are a number of primary care models currently in existence, some of which involve teams of health professionals working closely together.  The purposes of this pilot study are to: (a) describe what family physicians and allied primary (health) care providers do when an older adult needs CSSs, (b) identify variations in approach to CSS needs identification and linkage across different primary (health) care models, and (c) pilot test selected methods for the planned full scale study to be conducted. A qualitative case study design will be used.  Family physicians and allied primary (health) care providers in each model of care (i.e., Family Health Teams, Non-Family Health Team Family Health Organizations, fee-for-service practices, and Community Health Centres) will be interviewed and asked to describe what they do when an older adult needs a CSS.  The results of this study will be used to develop a large scale survey of primary (health) care providers' knowledge of CSSs and their suggestions to improve linkage of older adults to CSSs.  It is expected that study results will inform primary (health) care practice as well as policy at the levels of the local health integration network, and provincial level seeking to improve older adults' access to community support services.",1 yr 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=176684&lang=en
176685,SUCCEED: Strengthening Urban Communities' Capacity to Promote Environmental health Equity through Dialogue-centered Research,Frankish  Charles J,"Frankish, Charles J",University of British Columbia,British Columbia,Canada,200810,74686.0,Catalyst Grant: Population and Public Health,Operating Grants,Social / Cultural / Environmental / Population Health,Population and Public Health,Community-Based Research; Environmental Health; Environmental Justice; Health Equity; Photovoice; Social Justice,"This catalyst grant will help our new Vancouver and Toronto research-community partnerships to lay a foundation for a long term program of research focused on environmental health inequities in Canada¿ inner cities. This research is needed because current approaches to assessing the impact of urban environments on health defines ¿environment¿ too narrowly, and often measures environmental variables that have little relevance to communities who experience the greatest exposure to harm. We plan to use photography as a method to access community knowledge about ways that experiences in disadvantaged neighbourhoods impact the social determinants of health. The aim is to use this knowledge to improve the community relevance of environmental health assessment in urban settings in order to empower communities to support public health action. Community members from low-income neighbourhoods, Parkdale (Toronto) and Oppenheimer (Vancouver) will be trained on the use of photography as a research tool to document their health-related experiences in their neighbourhoods. They will then carry out field visits to low, medium, and high income neighbourhoods to take photos of things that make their neighbourhood particularly healthy or unhealthy relative to other neighbourhoods in the city. They will then gather their photos together to construct themes about environmental health inequity and the social determinants of health. A report of these themes will be written and discussed in a multisectoral workshop as the basis for the development of actionable indicators to support community-centred environmental justice action. Results will be broadly disseminated and discussed in order to build momentum for the development of a CIHR Operating Grant application aimed at developing community-relevant assessment and intervention tools that are designed to understand and overcome the complex social and physical determinants of health inequity that are entrenched in urban environments.",1 yr 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=176685&lang=en
176689,"Improving Medication Use, Health Care and Quality of Life Through Innovative Health Outcomes Research",Cadarette  Suzanne M,"Cadarette, Suzanne M",University of Toronto,Ontario,Canada,200810,75000.0,Catalyst Grant: Population and Public Health,Operating Grants,Social / Cultural / Environmental / Population Health,Aging,Adherence; Disease Prevention; Fractures; Osteoporosis; Pharmacoepidemiology,"Healthcare utilization (administrative claims) data are rich data sources to study drug safety and effectiveness. Through universal health coverage in Canada, claims data can track all medical procedures, tests and diagnoses by residents. Together with claims processed through provincial drug benefits, these data sources permit the study of how drugs are used, as well as drug effects. We outline two pilot projects that capitalize on claims data from Ontario to examine osteoporosis pharmacotherapy. 

First, valid estimates of the safety and effectiveness of therapeutics are required to help inform drug policy decision making. Unfortunately, results from claims-based observational studies may be biased due to incomplete information. We will use innovative methods that supplement claims data with other data sources to examine the potential benefits of these analytic strategies in improving estimates of the effectiveness of osteoporosis drugs among seniors.

Second, we know that adherence to therapy for osteoporosis is suboptimal. However, little information is available regarding the patterns of drug use or the implications of gaps in adherence to osteoporosis pharmacotherapy. We will study patterns of pharmacotherapy, predictors of large gaps in treatment and implications of gaps in adherence. Results will help identify the burden of osteoporosis in the population related to suboptimal adherence, and may be used to help develop quality improvement interventions. 

Results from these pilot projects will help inform future innovative projects that aim to reduce the burden of illness in the population due to adverse drug effects and failure to adhere to preventive pharmacotherapy. Results will be important to guide health policy, develop quality improvement interventions, reduce health care costs, and ultimately reduce the burden of illness in the population due to adverse drug effects and suboptimal adherence to chronic pharmacotherapy.",1 yr 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=176689&lang=en
176694,Social mobilization and planning for oral cancer control: a population-based intervention that addresses inequities,Rosin  Miriam P,"Rosin, Miriam P",B.C. Cancer Research Centre (Vancouver),British Columbia,Canada,200810,75000.0,Catalyst Grant: Population and Public Health,Operating Grants,Social / Cultural / Environmental / Population Health,Population and Public Health,Community-Based Health Promotion; Health Inequities; Oral Cancer Prevention; Population Health; Social Mobilization; Societal And Cultural Dimensions Of Health,"Few individuals are aware that cancer can occur inside of the mouth. This is a cancer site that is easily examined; yet most often, the disease is caught at a very late stage when the chance of death from it is high and treatment can be disfiguring and devastating. In British Columbia we have created a program that is working to improve detection and management of this disease. The program focuses on the development and transfer of new technology to community dental practices and the establishment of clinics for patient referral for evaluation and treatment. However, many of the individuals who are most at risk for developing such cancers will not be seen in these facilities. The goal of this project is to create a team of experts and community representatives that will create a research program focused on assessing and planning interventions for vulnerable communities that will fall outside of the scope of this developing program. For this project, we have identified 4 participant groups: South Asian immigrants, the Vancouver Downtown Eastside, Aboriginal communities, and groups who are in rural and remote regions of BC so are far from cancer control services. These 4 groups represent communities of people with low socioeconomic status, different ethnic backgrounds, or living in different geographic regions where risk factors, barriers to accessing services, and rates of disease are much higher. Our project will involve the development of partnerships with members and institutions in these communities to better understand their needs and develop research plans for control this disease. At the same time, we will be building linkages across Canada and internationally. We intend for the collaborations and other strategies in this project to set the stage for reducing inequities between and within provinces and territories, and globally.",1 yr 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=176694&lang=en
176697,CIHR Strategic Training Program in Vascular Research (STPVR),Fenster  Aaron,"Fenster, Aaron",Western University (Ontario),Ontario,Canada,200811,1950000.0,Training Grant,Operating Grants,Biomedical,Circulatory and Respiratory Health,Atherosclerosis; Cardiovascular; Cerebrovascular; Training Program; Vascular Imaging,"Our goal in developing our established transdisciplinary CIHR Strategic Training Program in Vascular Research (STPVR) was to integrate the expertise of well-established scientists at Robarts Research Institute, The University of Western Ontario, and the University of Waterloo, in the biological, physical, and engineering fields, to train the next generation of scientists by supplementing their specialized academic education with training in different aspects of vascular disease required for them to become leaders in their research fields. This new proposal for our training program will add some exciting new elements to our successful training program to teach students the critical professional skills required to make the transition from student to new investigator, and the translational skills required to move their discoveries and innovations into the clinical and private sectors. Our students fall into two major groups; those in disciplines urgently needed to help advance vascular research, such as physics, computer science, mathematics, and engineering, but who require extra training in the biological and genetic bases of vascular disease, and those students with strong backgrounds in medicine, genetics, cell, and molecular biology, who need the physics, engineering, and mathematical knowledge critical to advancing vascular research outcomes and discovery. Our overall goal is to develop top research scientists with the expertise to build their own transdisciplinary teams focused on the understanding, treatment, and prevention of cardiovascular and cerebrovascular disease. Only students who make a successful transition to professional scientist and who learn how to translate their discoveries into the clinic or industry will progress to become leaders of their own transdisciplinary teams. Our Strategic Training Program addresses these critical needs building on the success of our existing Program and with the introduction of new critical elements.",6 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=176697&lang=en
176742,CIHR Drug Development Training Program (DDTP),Papadopoulos  Vassilios,"Papadopoulos, Vassilios; Bergeron, John J; Damha, Masad J; Hales, Barbara F; Hébert, Terence E; Jean-Claude, Bertrand J; Laporte, Stéphane A; Moitessier, Nicolas R; Robaire, Bernard; Ward, Brian J",McGill University,Qu&eacute;bec,Canada,200811,1790000.0,Training Grant,Operating Grants,Biomedical,Infection and Immunity,Academia; Clinical Trials; Drug Discovery; Experimental Therapeutics; Industry,"Progress in biomedical research is driving an unprecedented pace of discovery in the understanding of the molecular mechanisms of disease. However, despite this progress, there is an enormous gap between the discovery of tools that improve our knowledge of disease processes and the numbers of new therapies ""translated"" to the bedside. This proposal for a Drug Development Training Program (DDTP) is based on the premise that introducing students to strategies designed to develop candidate molecules into useful drugs will accelerate translation and lead to a greater impact of basic research on disease management. This program brings together strong basic science and clinical research at McGill University and the McGill University Health Centre (MUHC) together with local Biopharmaceutical Industry partners to expose students to the process, successes and failures of state-of-the-art drug development efforts. It is our goal that DDTP will train the academic and industry leaders who will develop the next generation of therapies to benefit all Canadians.",6 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=176742&lang=en
176752,THE MOLECULAR DETERMINANTS OF PROXIMAL TUBULAR CALCIUM ABSORPTION,Alexander  Robert T,"Alexander, Robert T",University of Alberta,Alberta,Canada,200809,300000.0,CIHR Clinician Scientist - Phase 2,Salary Programs,Biomedical,"Nutrition, Metabolism and Diabetes",Calcium Homeostasis; Ion Transport; Kidney Stones; Knockout Mice; Osteoporosis; Proximal Tubule,"Both kidney stone formation and osteoporosis are diseases characterized by increased urinary excretion of calcium. Unfortunately, to date, why certain individuals waste calcium is not known. These studies seek to understand this. The proposed research is specifically aimed at understanding how calcium, once filtered by the glomerulus (individual kidney filter), is reabsorbed back into the proximal tubule. This part of the nephron (single kidney tubule) was chosen as it is where the greatest amount (>60%)of calcium is absorbed from. Previous studies have implicated sodium reabsorption in this process. However, whether the molecular determinants of sodium absorption, mediate calcium absorption has not been directly tested. This will be done both in a tissue culture model of proximal tubular cells and in knockout mice. A sodium transport protein, the epithelial sodium proton exchanger, NHE3, is central to proximal tubular sodium absorption. Therefore its role in calcium reabsorption will be delineated. First in cell culture models, then in NHE3 knockout mice. The latter studies will look for the effects of calcium wasting on the whole animal. Together the proposed research will delineate molecular details of renal calcium regulation and consequently provide insight into renal calcium wasting and its consequences,kidney stones and osteoporosis.",3 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=176752&lang=en
176780,CIHR/NCCPH Training Grant in Population Health Intervention Research (PHIRNET),Potvin  Louise,"Potvin, Louise; Hawe, Penelope(Penny)",Universit&eacute; de Montr&eacute;al,Qu&eacute;bec,Canada,200811,1696000.0,Training Grant,Operating Grants,Social / Cultural / Environmental / Population Health,Population and Public Health,Community Capacity Building Practices; Health Inequalities; Multi-Centered Training Network; Population Health Intervention Research; Scaling Up Graduate Student Training Capacity; Social Determinants Of Health,"This application is about equipping Canada for the ""sea-change"" that is coming in population health. We refer to the switch of attention from studying the causes and determinants of health problems, ""to the science and practice of solving them"", the field known as population health intervention research (PHIR). Seven universities are combining to construct a training program which (1) focuses on four main themes/priority areas in PHIR (methods; economic evaluation, ethics and research governance; and interventions addressing social health inequalities);(2) produces and delivers a shared curriculum around key competencies in PHIR; (3) develops web based resources for learning within and beyond the STIHR network; (4) recruits students and facilitates training pathways across the seven sites; (5) facilitates learning in both official languages; and (6) partners with the National Collaborating Centres for Public Health (NCC PH) in order to maximise contacts and relationships between producers of primary PHIR, those committed to synthesising this knowledge and end users (decision-makers and practitioners) With the demand and need for PHIR increasing in connection with the pressure to develop evidence-informed public health practices, our STIHR addresses how the supply of skilled researchers will be met.",6 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=176780&lang=en
176782,CIHR Strategic Training Program in Work Disability Prevention,Loisel  Patrick,"Loisel, Patrick",University of Toronto,Ontario,Canada,200811,1945000.0,Training Grant,Operating Grants,Social / Cultural / Environmental / Population Health,Population and Public Health,Advanced Training Program; Community Of Practice; International Program; Return To Work; Transdisciplinarity; Work Disability Prevention,"Work disability, occurring when a worker is unable to remain at or resume work because of a health problem, is prevalent and imposes a heavy burden on Canadian society and abroad. In 2002, the CIHR acknowledged the need for developing capacity in the field of work disability prevention (WDP) by subsidizing the development and implementation of the WDP CIHR Strategic Training Program, a unique training program in the world. The main objective of this program is to help future researchers develop transdisciplinary knowledge, skills and attitudes regarding WDP. The WDP Training Program is an advanced diploma program which is superimposed onto the doctoral or post-doctoral studies taken by the trainees at their own universities. During the last 6 years, the Program has trained 54 high-quality trainees from 11 countries. This proposal pursues two objectives: (1) to continue to improve young researchers' training in WDP and (2) to develop an international community of practice in WDP. This proposal gathers a large team of 30 highly qualified mentors with various expertises and from 16 universities, 9 research centres, and 4 countries. Also, this application proposes the organisation of a community of practice that had spontaneously emerged from the experience of the Program participants. Not only will it be formally organized to foster year-round knowledge building among trainees, alumni and mentors, but it will also be extended for the benefit of stakeholders and allow for their participation. Over the past years, this training program has contributed to raise national training standards and reinforce Canada's international leadership role in building WDP capacity. Working toward the objectives of this proposal will allow the development of knowledge building, translation and exchange to help reduce the individual and societal burden of work disability. Continuation of the grant will allow excellence to be maintained as the training program moves toward full autonomy.",6 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=176782&lang=en
176786,Regulatory Policy and the Availability of Psychopharmacologic Agents,Shorter  Edward,"Shorter, Edward",University of Toronto,Ontario,Canada,200809,75000.0,Operating Grant - Priority Announcement: History of Medicine,Operating Grants,Social / Cultural / Environmental / Population Health,"Neurosciences, Mental Health and Addiction",Drug Regulation - History; Psychiatric Disorders - Drug Treatment; Psychopharmacology - History,"According to its official mission statement, the U.S. Food and Drug Administration is responsible for protecting and advancing the public health by ensuring the availability of safe and effective products.  Yet our previous research indicates that in the area of psychiatric drug regulation, the agency's policies have instead resulted in outcomes detrimental to the public health, specifically:

1. The approval of new drugs that are less effective than the best medications already available.
2. Drugs released much later in the United States than in other countries, or not licensed at all.

The proposed research sets out to answer the question, How did these both of these problems arise?  The study will use historical research methods to trace the evolution of regulatory policy and decision-making at the FDA, based largely on primary records either still in the agency's custody or transferred to the National Archives and Records Administration.  Details concerning drugs licensed in the United States and other jurisdictions will be assembled from a wide variety of sources, including regulators' lists, national formularies, comparative studies, and medical/pharmacologic literature.",3 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=176786&lang=en
176822,CIHR Training Program in Regenerative Medicine,Levy  Gary A,"Levy, Gary A",University Health Network (Toronto),Ontario,Canada,200811,1950000.0,Training Grant,Operating Grants,Biomedical,Circulatory and Respiratory Health,Gene Therapy; Regenerative Medicine; Stem Cells; Tolerance; Transplantation,"Organ failure is a pervasive medical problem that results in immense personal and economic costs, morbidity, and death.  At present, the only truly effective treatment for organ failure is transplantation.  The deficiencies of this option are increasingly apparent, and include a chronic shortage of donor organs, side effects from harsh immunosuppressive medications, and chronic rejection leading to the eventual loss of most transplanted organs.  
    The nascent field of regenerative medicine, defined as the practice of repair, regeneration, or replacement of tissues and organs that have failed, has enormous potential to revolutionize diagnostic and therapeutic alternatives to transplantation via the development of radical new therapies.  
     At present, there are few scientists and practitioners of regenerative medicine, and we have now developed the only comprehensive training program in this important field in Canada. It is essential that this program continue to be funded in partnership with industry to identify and train scientists who will lead this important new field in health research.",6 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=176822&lang=en
176839,CIHR Multidisciplinary Training in Drug Development (M-TraDD) Program,Burt  Helen M,"Burt, Helen M",University of British Columbia,British Columbia,Canada,200811,1788400.0,Training Grant,Operating Grants,Biomedical,Cancer Research,Drug Design And Synthesis; Drug Development; Drug Evaluation; Drug Formulation And Delivery; Drug Screening; Drug Target Identification,"The Multidisciplinary Training in Drug Development (M-TraDD) program is a Centre for Drug Research and Development (CDRD) initiative. CDRD is the first of its kind in Canada. Its mission is to take drug discoveries from the Universities and Teaching Hospitals of British Columbia and develop them into new medicines to treat diseases. 
The process of drug discovery and development takes a long time and requires the expertise of many different disciplines such as chemistry, biology, etc. Therefore, researchers who are experts in one field often do not have the expertise or the access to the specialized equipment and personnel to move their discoveries from the laboratory to the clinic. This is where CDRD gets involved. CDRD offers both specialized equipment and personnel who are knowledgeable in drug discovery and development. CDRD assists with the identification of disease targets and the drugs that act on them, the development of new, more effective drugs, the formulation of drugs into medicines suitable for human use, and the testing of the medicines to ensure they are effective and safe. Because CDRD offers not only a variety of expertise, but also the latest in equipment and technology, it is an ideal environment to train talented individuals in drug discovery and development. The trainees will take specialized courses and modules. Further, they will become part of multidisciplinary teams working to develop new medicines. They will have a unique opportunity to work with different technologies and alongside colleagues with very different scientific backgrounds to their own. The trainees will not only develop a vast array of scientific skills but also communication and organizational skills. Such well-rounded individuals with an understanding of the entire drug development process are highly sought after. We expect M-TraDD graduates to become leaders in the drive to develop new and more effective medicines for the benefit of Canadians and patients worldwide.",6 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=176839&lang=en
176853,Implications of activated BMP signalling and Id1/Id3 function in ovarian cancer pathogenesis,Shepherd  Trevor G,"Shepherd, Trevor G",Western University (Ontario),Ontario,Canada,200809,0.0,Operating Grant - Priority Announcement: Ovarian Cancer (bridge funding),Operating Grants,Biomedical,Cancer Research,Bmp Signalling; Id Genes; Ovarian Cancer; Spheroids; Transgenic Mice; Viral Transduction,"Ovarian cancer has one of the highest mortality rates of all cancers in women due primarily to unreliable early detection and ineffective drugs to treat the disease after it has spread. Key to developing better detection methods and treatments is the discovery of molecules that drive the evolution of ovarian cancer. Therefore, the goal of our research is to generate new experimental models for the study of molecules involved in the initiation and progression of ovarian cancer. The molecules we will study are bone morphogenetic protein (BMP) signal proteins, and two genes controlled by BMPs, specifically Id1 and Id3. How BMP signals and Id1 and Id3 genes affect the behaviour of normal cells of the ovary and ovarian cancer cells will be studied using three new ""model systems"" being developed in our laboratory:
Aim #1: Collect ovarian cancer cells from patients and grow them in the lab under conditions that imitate how they grow in an ovarian cancer patient--direct molecular and cellular analysis of ovarian cancer cells from patients using this model system will provide more accurate results and thereby generate clinically-relevant insights into the disease;
Aim #2: Establish ovarian tumours on the surface of shell-less chick embryos as a model of ovarian cancer growth--this is a unique opportunity to develop an innovative ""bioassay"" for future testing of new drugs that can be used to treat ovarian cancer patients;
Aim #3: Develop genetically-altered mice which mimic early stages of ovarian cancer--understanding the initial changes that cause normal cells of the ovary to become cancer cells is indispensable to develop new strategies for prevention and early detection of ovarian cancer
These Aims will define the role of BMP signals and Id1 and Id3 molecules in both early and late stages of ovarian cancer, develop innovative experimental models for future research, and potentially identify new and important drug targets to treat women diagnosed with ovarian cancer.",1 yr 3 mths,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=176853&lang=en
176854,In vivo evaluation of new anticancer agents for site-specific treatment of breast and ovarian cancers,Berube  Gervais,"Berube, Gervais; Asselin, Eric",Universit&eacute; du Qu&eacute;bec &agrave; Trois-Rivi&egrave;res,Qu&eacute;bec,Canada,200809,0.0,Operating Grant - Priority Announcement: Ovarian Cancer (bridge funding),Operating Grants,Clinical,Cancer Research,Breast Cancer; Chemotherapy; Ovarian Cancer; Platinum-Based Drugs; Steroids; Synthesis,"Breast and ovarian cancers are two of the most important cancers in women worldwide. The development of novel and more potent anticancer agents with increased specificity for these cancer cells will minimize the adverse side effects of common chemotherapeutic drugs such as nausea and vomiting. Consequently, this type of anticancer agent will improve the quality of life for patients afflicted with these diseases. This research project is studying such type of anticancer agents that we recently developed in our laboratory. 

More specifically, this project seeks to use the natural female steroidal hormone, estradiol, as a specific carrier molecule of a highly potent anticancer moiety to breast and ovarian cancer cells via the estrogen receptor. This project will evaluate the true capacity of these unique anticancer drugs to target and to cure these cancers in two different animal models. Thus, drug targeting (a more precise and powerful mean of drug treatment) will improve the available treatments for these cancers. Finally, the novel anticancer agents could give access to complementary and/or new therapies, exempt of toxic side effects, useful to patients in this relentless fight against breast and ovarian cancers.",1 yr 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=176854&lang=en
176865,CIHR Training Grant in Musculoskeletal Health Research and Leadership,Dixon  S. Jeffrey,"Dixon, S. Jeffrey; Beier, Frank; Birmingham, Trevor B; Bourne, Robert B; Bryant, Dianne M; Doherty, Timothy J; Dunning, Cynthia E; Garland, S. J; Goldberg, Harvey A; Gwadry-Sridhar, Femida H; Hamilton, Douglas W; Holdsworth, David W; Hunter, Graeme K; Hurtig, Mark B; Johnson, James A; King, Graham John W; Kloseck, Marita; Leask, Andrew C; Litchfield, Robert B; MacDermid, Joy C; Maly, Monica R; Petrella, Robert J; Sims, Stephen M",Western University (Ontario),Ontario,Canada,200811,1784000.0,Training Grant,Operating Grants,Clinical,Musculoskeletal Health and Arthritis,Biomechanics; Community Health; Joint Disease; Leadership; Musculoskeletal Health; Skeletal Biology,"This CIHR training program is offered through a partnership among several established areas of excellence in musculoskeletal health research in Southwestern Ontario.  Trainees will have the unique opportunity to participate in cutting-edge transdisciplinary research and knowledge translation, while gaining the leadership skills and experience that are essential for scientific progress in the 21st century.   By providing a vigorous transdisciplinary training environment, JuMP will increase research capacity and productivity in Canada and develop future leaders in musculoskeletal health research.  The importance of preventing and treating musculoskeletal disorders are widely recognized, especially with the emergence of an aging population.  JuMP will train the leaders who can meet the upcoming challenges in musculoskeletal health research and who will significantly improve the health, mobility and quality of life of Canadians.",6 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=176865&lang=en
176922,CIHR Training Program in Integrative Approaches to Human Health,Hallett  Michael T,"Hallett, Michael T",McGill University,Qu&eacute;bec,Canada,200811,1766127.0,Training Grant,Operating Grants,Biomedical,Genetics,Bioinformatics; Cancer; Complex Diseases; Computational Biology; Genomics; Imaging; Mathematical Modelling; Orphan Diseases; Proteomics; Quantitative Biology; Systems Biology,"High-throughput (eg microarrays, sequencing) and high-content (eg single cell imaging, chemical screening) assays are now an integral part of biomedicine, and have produced successes that are now finding clinical utility. This is true for a range of human diseases including cancer, diabetes, fibrosis and many orphan/neglected diseases. A consequence of the use of these approaches is the need for inter-disciplinary teams that simultaneously provide the excellence to develop these technologies, to model the data quantitatively, and to extract from these models physiologically relevant knowledge that will have impact in the clinic. Such teams involve a broad range of researchers including clinicians, basic researchers, quantitative scientists and experts in technology. Since traditional training programs provide for depth in a single area of research, the current generation of students tends to understand only a small fraction of these systems or integrative biology projects. This ignorance represents an enormous conceptual and practical training challenge. Our program will provide students with a mature understanding of the biology by integrating the trainees into inter-disciplinary research teams. Workshops and courses will provide students from the quantitative sciences instruction in laboratory techniques, and students with biomedical or technological backgrounds instruction in statistics, modeling and computation. Through a seminar series, yearly retreats and special interest groups, the program will introduce students to ethical and translational issues related to their work. By the end of their studies, trainees will have both an in depth understanding of their specific research area and a broad overview of systems and integrative techniques used to study human disease, that the next generation of Canadian researchers will be primed to initiate and drive inter-disciplinary research programs.",6 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=176922&lang=en
176960,CIHR Training Grant in Bioinformatics for Health Research,Jones  Steven,"Jones, Steven; Brinkman, Fiona S",University of British Columbia,British Columbia,Canada,200811,1950000.0,Training Grant,Operating Grants,Biomedical,Genetics,Bioinformatics; Computer Science; Epidemiology; Genomics; Proteomics; Statistics,"The explosion of genetic information, such as the sequencing of the human genome, has created a demand for highly skilled scientists who have a combination of computational and biological training. The bioinformatics training program meets this need in Canada by training scientists to work in this specialized environment of using biomedical information to improve health research. This interdisciplinary program has been successful in bringing together leading biomedical and informatics scientists from key institutions in British Columbia. During its 6 years of development, the program has established a training platform of sufficient depth to produce scientists with exactly the right combination of skills to exploit the enormous and increasing quantities of biological and health data. Students, undertaking a Masters or PhD in Bioinformatics, are educated through a series of team-taught graduate courses that include ethics training¿an area that is currently topical in health research. The instructors also use progressive teaching approaches, such as problem-based learning. The innovative research rotation portion of the training program engages students in multiple research areas and different methodologies, which adds important skills for resolving major health issues and scientific challenges. Students rotate to academic laboratories and translational research groups at hospitals and industry both in Canada and abroad. By expanding the scope of a student¿s research interactions, each is better equipped with team-based research skills, which are an increasingly valuable asset in solving critical health care issues. A renewed training program will continue to provide excellence in bioinformatics training through innovation and integration of ethics, and will further expand its strong team-based and translational research skills¿all of which set it apart from other bioinformatics programs.",6 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=176960&lang=en
176961,CIHR Strategic Training Program in Chemical Biology,Thomas  David Y,"Thomas, David Y",McGill University,Qu&eacute;bec,Canada,200811,1538350.0,Training Grant,Operating Grants,Biomedical,Genetics,Asthma; Biochemistry; Bioinformatics; Biopharmaceutical; Chemical; Chemical Biology; Chemistry; Cystic Fibrosis; Genetics; Infectious Diseases; Pharmacology; Structural Biology,"Chemical Biology is a new research field that seeks to identify and to exploit novel small molecules as tools to determine precisely the ways in which specific biochemical and genetic processes contribute to the normal, and in some cases the pathological, behavior of cells and organs in humans and other organisms. We propose to develop our existing program in Chemical Biology to offer trainees not only rigorous training in the discipline of chemical biology itself, but also a meaningful exposure to the challenges and potential of translating basic research findings into clinically useful diagnostic, preventative and  therapeutic approaches to two major types of human disease: respiratory disease, focusing on asthma and cystic fibrosis, and infectious diseases. Graduates of our training program will be equipped not only with outstanding training in the methods and strategies of chemical biology, but also with a heightened awareness of the nature of translational research and of the opportunities (and needs) for them to contribute their skills in this vital research area.",5 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=176961&lang=en
176979,Universities without walls: A CIHR Training Grant in HIV/AIDS Health Research,Rourke  Sean B,"Rourke, Sean B; Adam, Barry D; Gahagan, Jacqueline C; Hogg, Robert S; Jolly, Rosemary J; Kirkland, Susan A; Mykhalovskiy, Eric; Orsini, Michael; Patton, Cynthia K; Worthington, Catherine A",Unity Health Toronto,Ontario,Canada,200811,1790000.0,Training Grant,Operating Grants,Health systems / services,Infection and Immunity,Collaborative Research; Field-Based Mentoring; Health Services Research; Hiv/Aids; Interdisciplinary; Population Health Research,"The Ontario HIV Treatment Network (OHTN) / St. Michael¿s Hospital-led Centre for Interdisciplinary Training and Research in HIV and AIDS (CITRHA) is an innovative model for learning, mentorship, training and research. CITRHA will build an national interdisciplinary learning network -- connecting faculty in six major academic training hubs (Dalhousie, Queen¿s, St. Michael¿s Hospital, University of Windsor, University of Calgary, and Simon Fraser University) as well as faculty in 20 other universities across the nation -- 14 front-line organizations and 7 policy-makers. The Centre will provide a dynamic academic and service learning environment that will attract outstanding students across a wide range of disciplines and develop 60 to 70 new social science researchers skilled in interdisciplinary research, community-based research, ethics, and knowledge translation who are able to work collaboratively with other researchers, community and policy makers to have a national and global impact on the HIV/AIDS epidemic.

Major Aims and Objectives of CITRHA: 1) Establish a National Training Network; 2) Build an Interdisciplinary Training Model and Approach; 3) Broaden Content Learning Opportunities; 4) Offer Practical Training Opportunities; and 5) Monitor and Evaluate the Success of CITRHA.",6 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=176979&lang=en
176980,CIHR Training Program in Protein Folding and Interaction Dynamics: Principles and Diseases,Houry  Walid A,"Houry, Walid A; Forman-Kay, Julie D",University of Toronto,Ontario,Canada,200811,1950000.0,Training Grant,Operating Grants,Biomedical,Infection and Immunity,Absorbance; Alzheimer; Analytical Ultracentrifugation; Bacterial Infection; Bioinformatics; Cancer; Chaperones; Circular Dichroism; Computational Biology; Disease; Fluorescence; Folding; Microscopes; Misfolding; Nmr; Parkinson; Prions; Protein-Protein Interactions; Proteins; Proteomics; Training; X-Ray,"Understanding protein folding and protein interactions is one of the central concerns in biology. While the structure of the protein native state is dictated by the amino acid sequence of the protein, the mechanisms of spontaneous and chaperone-assisted folding remain elusive. Furthermore, the mechanisms by which protein aggregation causes neurotoxicity is also poorly understood. Building on our previous six years of funding, the CIHR Training Program in ""Protein Folding and Interaction Dynamics: Principles and Diseases"" will facilitate research into these fundamental questions by providing an excellent training environment and by encouraging the use of multidisciplinary and transdisciplinary approaches. Our program brings together scientists from various disciplines to encourage cross-disciplinary research encompassing computational, in vitro, in vivo, and disease-related aspects of protein folding.",6 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=176980&lang=en
176981,CIHR Training Program in Health Applications of Cell Signaling in Mucosal Inflammation & Pain.,Ellen  Richard P,"Ellen, Richard P; McCulloch, Christopher A",University of Toronto,Ontario,Canada,200811,1950000.0,Training Grant,Operating Grants,Biomedical,Musculoskeletal Health and Arthritis,Career Planning; Cell Signals; Ethics; Health; Inflammation; Interdisciplinary; International Network; Knowledge Translation; Pain; Team Research; Training; Translational Research,"Inflammation causes considerable loss of function and pain.  Mucosal inflammatory diseases affect the lining of the mouth, GI tract, respiratory tract, and genito-urinary tract and are caused by infections, allergens, environmental and food toxins, and auto-immune reactions.  The goal is to implement an interdisciplinary training network to educate a new generation of investigators who will apply team-oriented research training to the generation of new diagnosis/treatment strategies for the prevention and management of mucosal inflammatory diseases.",6 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=176981&lang=en
176985,CIHR/ICR-funded Psychosocial Oncology Research Training (PORT) program,Loiselle  Carmen G,"Loiselle, Carmen G",McGill University,Qu&eacute;bec,Canada,200811,1950000.0,Training Grant,Operating Grants,Social / Cultural / Environmental / Population Health,Cancer Research,Access To Quality Cancer Supportive Care; And Mixed Methods; Breast; Colorectal; Evaluation; Health Services Utilization Research; Lung); Prevalent Cancers (E.G.; Prostate; Psychosocial Oncology And Survivorship Research; Qualitive; Quantitive; Research Capacity Building,"Cancer remains a leading cause of disability and death in Canada.  Aging of the population and advances in cancer screening and treatment means that more individuals are now living with the aftermath of cancer such as important psychological, physical, financial and social ramifications. PORT (Psychosocial Oncology Research Training) is a transdisciplinary research training program whose goal is to prepare a new generation of scientists from coast-to-coast in the development, implementation, evaluation, and transfer of theoretically-based approaches to cancer supportive care and survivorship. This much-needed initiative began its operation in 2003 at four participating universities (UBC, Manitoba, McGill, and Dalhousie).  PORT offers a core evidence-based seminar, internships, continuing research training and fellowships to promising young researchers. This renewal application seeks to broaden the scope of the program through the inclusion of 3 new research sites (U. Toronto, U. Calgary and U. Laval). The renewed critical mass of internationally-renowned researchers in the field and their promising graduate students will ensure that cutting-edge cancer survivorship knowledge continues to be developed to make a significant difference in the lives of individuals and their families living with cancer.",6 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=176985&lang=en
176991,CIHR Strategic Training Initiative in Transplantation Research,Chung  Stephen W,"Chung, Stephen W",University of British Columbia,British Columbia,Canada,200811,1950000.0,Training Grant,Operating Grants,Biomedical,Infection and Immunity,Biomedical Ethics; Biomedical Sciences; Clinical Sciences; Health Policy; Research Training; Transplantation,"The objective of this proposal is to support the Strategic Health Research Training Program in Transplantation to enable research students to interact together in a multidisciplinary basis with an innovative collaborative team of research scientists, clinician-scientists and allied health professionals. The goals are to encourage these students to consider the implications of their research in the global field of transplantation and to provide opportunities for them to develop careers in all aspects of Transplantation. It is expected that the students will consider the impact of their research on the advancement of patient care.",6 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=176991&lang=en
177000,CIHR Canadian Child Health Clinician Scientist Training Program,Rosenblum  Norman D,"Rosenblum, Norman D",Hospital for Sick Children (Toronto),Ontario,Canada,200811,1950000.0,Training Grant,Operating Grants,Clinical,"Human Development, Child and Youth Health",Biomedical; Child Health; Clinical Research; Clinician-Scientist; Curriculum; Epidemiology; Health Services; Interdisciplinary; Training,"Clinician scientists, expert in clinical and research disciplines, are uniquely qualified to link science to human health. Yet, a shortage of clinician scientists exists across all child health professions in Canada. The Canadian Child Health Clinician Scientist Program (CCHCSP) was founded in 2002 with the goal of training a new generation of child health clinician scientists trained to lead interdisciplinary research. CCHCSP created a financial model to enable child health clinicians to train in research, recruited 46 clinicians in 7 clinical disciplines at 11 Canadian universities to its training pathways, and created an innovative on-line curriculum that fosters the knowledge and skills needed for success as a clinician scientist. In addition to CCHCSP trainees, 393 other clinicians and research trainees and 94 faculty from 7 child health clinical disciplines have participated in the on-line curriculum, a strong demonstration of its 'added-value' beyond existing curricula. Our graduates have been recruited to clinician scientist faculty positions at Canadian universities. During the next 6 years, CCHCSP will continue to recruit clinicians across the breadth of child health disciplines for training as clinician scientists since the human resource gap is far greater than the 46 individuals recruited to date. Second, CCHCSP will introduce a new curriculum aimed at educating CCHCSP trainees in the theory and practice of team research (as compared to individual led research), since evidence shows that successful solutions to health problems are likely achieved by multidisciplinary research teams. Third, CCHCSP will introduce a new curriculum in which trainees will be mentored individually with their supervisors on the integration of knowledge translation into their research proposals to enable them to impact health care delivery via their research. With these approaches, CCHCSP will continue at the vanguard of clinician scientist training at the international level.",6 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=177000&lang=en
177003,"CIHR Training Grant in Pain in Child Health, an innovative, international, trans-disciplinary research training consortium Phase II",McGrath  Patrick J,"McGrath, Patrick J; Craig, Kenneth D; Finley, G. A; Grunau, Ruth E; Johnston, Celeste; Stevens, Bonnie J; Von Baeyer, Carl L",IWK Health Centre (Halifax),Nova Scotia,Canada,200811,1950000.0,Training Grant,Operating Grants,Health systems / services,"Human Development, Child and Youth Health",Ethics /Knowledge Translation; Health Services Research; Mentoring/ Collaboration; Musculoskeletal Pain; Pediatric Pain,"Pain in Child Health (PICH) is an innovative cross disciplinary research training consortium that originally linked research centres in 5 cities across Canada and created a community of scholars in pediatric pain. The consortium has expanded, with funding from Mayday Foundation in New York,to include mentors and trainees from around the world.  The trainees in PICH are becoming the next generation of pediatric pain researchers.  They have published over 370 peer-reviewed papers during the first phase of PICH.
We continue to create a virtual community of pediatric pain research training centres using information technology, trainee exchanges and a summer/fall institute.   
   Pain in infants and children is of critical importance both because of its immediate biological, psychological and social effects and because of the potential long term effects on pain sensitivity and on learning and social functoning.  PICH faculty have been at the forefront of research in this area and this initiative has lead to significant strengthening of the skills of trainees and an increase in the number of highly qualified personel in this area.  These are the prerequisites for further advances in the science of pediatric pain. The consortium has garnered strong support from its academic and industry partners and the international community.
   The training consortium familiarizes trainees with knowledge that is outside their own focus and fosters cross fertilization and greater collaboration across disciplines and across centres.  This initiative will create new understanding of how to protect our most vulnerable citizens from the scourge of unnecessary pain.",6 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=177003&lang=en
177005,CIHR Strategic Training Program in the Social Aetiology of Mental Illness,Noh  Samuel,"Noh, Samuel; Mckenzie, Kwame J",Centre for Addiction and Mental Health (Toronto),Ontario,Canada,200811,1783890.0,Training Grant,Operating Grants,Social / Cultural / Environmental / Population Health,"Neurosciences, Mental Health and Addiction",Aetiology; Community Based Research; Diverse Populations; Mental Disorders; Social Determinants; Training,"Mental health and addiction disorders account for five of the top ten leading causes of disability worldwide. The reasons why people develop these illnesses are complex with biological, psychological and social factors interacting at multiple levels.  Biological investigation, such as molecular, genetic, and brain-imaging research increased understanding of the mechanisms involved but this work needs to be combined with an understanding of social processes in order to convert discoveries into public health advances.  

The quality and quantity of mental health researchers with expertise in social causation has not kept pace with those interested in biology.   The recent World Health Organization report, ""Closing the Gap in a Generation"" underlines the importance of social determinants in improving health and notes improved training of health researchers is vital.  

Sophisticated inter-disciplinary expertise is required to integrate work on social, psychological, and biological causes.  In Canada, an advanced research training program is needed to encourage the development of evidence-based prevention methods and effective ways to deal with the social determinants of recovery.

The Social Aetiology of Mental Illness training program will create a new generation of advanced experts through an interdisciplinary collaboration focusing on the social determinants of mental disorders and models of causation. It will train researchers from diverse fields including medicine, health sciences, social work, and social sciences and produce a new cadre of researchers equipped to investigate causation and ultimately translate into health prevention and promotion initiatives.  It will produce national and international networks of interested professionals that will further build capacity while leading the field. The faculty, from a number of institutions in Canada, the USA, the UK, and the Netherlands are world experts.",6 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=177005&lang=en
177009,Neurophysics CIHR Training Grant,De Koninck  Yves,"De Koninck, Yves",Universit&eacute; Laval,Qu&eacute;bec,Canada,200811,1950000.0,Training Grant,Operating Grants,Biomedical,"Neurosciences, Mental Health and Addiction",Advanced Microscopy; Cellular Imaging; Computational Neurosciences; Nanotechnologies; Neuroscience; Photonics,"This proposal is for the renewal of our Training Program at the interface between Neurosciences, Photonics, the Nanotechnologies and Computational sciences.  The objective of this training program is to create a generation of Health Scientists with a truly transdisciplinary attitude and ability to apply and develop novel approaches derived from the fields of Physics, Chemistry and Computational Sciences for the study of neural mechanisms and disorders, including epilepsy, Parkinson's and Huntington's diseases, Alzheimer's disease, schizophrenia, depression and anxiety disorders, multiple sclerosis, neuropathies and chronic pain.  Fields of research covered include: neuroanatomy, neurophysiology, neuropharmacology, ion channel biophysics, molecular biology, biochemistry, advanced microscopy, transgenic technology and studies ranging from cell cultures to whole animals, computational neurosciences, non-linear optics, laser science, fibre-optics, tissue spectroscopy, scanning-probe microscopy, micromachining, physical organic chemistry, bioanalytical chemistry, lipid-protein interactions, novel biosensors and image analysis approaches.",6 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=177009&lang=en
177012,Natural killer T cell trafficking in the liver,Wong  Connie H,"Wong, Connie H",University of Calgary,Alberta,Canada,200810,60000.0,CAG/CIHR Fellowship for Research in Gastroenterology/Nutrition,Fellowship Programs,Biomedical,Infection and Immunity,Adhesion Molecules; Immunology; Infection; Inflammation; Liver; Natural Killer T Cells; Trafficking,"Natural killer T (NKT) cells are a recently discovered immune cell that is found throughout the body, but predominantly located in the liver. There is a growing body of evidence to suggest that NKT cells are critical in the regulation of many different types of immune responses, ranging from tumour detection to development of autoimmunity and pathogen responses. However, it remains unclear how NKT cells can play such diverse roles from one type of immune response to another. Recently, our laboratory developed a new way of visualising the behaviour of these NKT cells in the liver using spinning disk microscopy. It was observed that these cells roam around the liver in a 'patrolling' manner looking for signs of infection and abnormal tissue. However, the mechanisms responsible for NKT cell trafficking in the liver are unknown and clearly require further attention. Therefore, the aims of this application are: 1) investigate how NKT cells get into the liver after being produced in the thymus; 2) when activated, which molecules are important in inducing firm adhesion of NKT cells leading to the release of cytokines and 3) which cell types in the liver present antigens to NKT cells to mediate infection and autoimmune responses. These experiments will provide us with important insights into the biology of NKT cells. Whatever their mechanism of action, understanding how NKT cells can orchestrate the immune responses will provide opportunities for translation to human diseases.",2 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=177012&lang=en
177015,"The CIHR International Infectious Diseases and Global Health Training Program: Four Continents, One Shared Experience",Fowke  Keith R,"Fowke, Keith R; Plummer, Francis A",University of Manitoba,Manitoba,Canada,200811,1950000.0,Training Grant,Operating Grants,Social / Cultural / Environmental / Population Health,Infection and Immunity,Aboriginal Health; Emerging Infectious Diseases; Global Health; Hiv/Aids; International Health; Microbial Resistance,"For those who are lucky enough to spend a portion of their research career in a developing country, a common sentiment is that the experience changed their lives and refocused their field of investigation.  Imagine the impact on a young researcher of being involved in a training program that not only focuses on international health issues using a multidisciplinary approach, but does so from four major international training sites.  From these sites the trainees, both Canadian and international, conduct their research, work as teammates on joint study projects and come together annually for intensive coursework at one of the major training sites. The theme of the International Infectious Disease and Global Health Training Program is ""Four Continents, One Shared Experience"".  The goal of this Training Program is not only to inform the trainees about the issues, challenges and opportunities of multidisciplinary international health research but to have them experience it for themselves.",6 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=177015&lang=en
177023,The CIHR/FRSQ Training Program in Cancer Research at McGill,Tremblay  Michel L,"Tremblay, Michel L; Miller, Wilson H",McGill University,Qu&eacute;bec,Canada,200811,975000.0,Training Grant,Operating Grants,Biomedical,Cancer Research,Cancer Research; Collaborative; Ethics; Multidisciplinary Program; Scientific Management; Training; Translational Research,"The McGill Integrated Cancer Research Training Program (MICRTP) seeks to support the development of future scientific leaders with the mission of developing and maintaining a diverse educational program that stimulates and supports basic and clinical research training thus encouraging the translation of discoveries for the benefit of patients.  Our vision is to bridge basic, translational and clinical Cancer research.  
This program will also promote the development of well-rounded scientists through the interdisciplinary activities offered to our trainees and the expansion of their management skills facilitating their participation in large-scale projects and biopharmaceutical initiatives.  We propose to strengthen our programs by combining our existing programs, the Montreal Centre for Experimental Therapeutics in Cancer (MCETC) based at the Segal Cancer Centre (SCC), and the McGill Cancer Centre, now called the Goodman Cancer Centre (GCC), into one and supplementing critical skills needed by the next wave of cancer trainees.  The program is intended to catalyze a change in graduate education for students, for faculty and for the institution by establishing innovative models of education.  In bridging our efforts within and across multiple departments in our institutes and hospitals, we now have the opportunity to develop combined scientific workshops and symposia, thus providing a framework for integrating innovative research (basic, clinical and translational) with essential skills (ethics, knowledge translation, bioinformatics and professional skills).  We believe that this dynamic program will provide trainees with the edge needed to become talented biomedical scientists and clinicians as well as leaders in Cancer research.",6 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=177023&lang=en
177024,CIHR Integrated Training Program in Basic and Clinical Aspects of Neuroinflammation,David  Samuel,"David, Samuel",McGill University,Qu&eacute;bec,Canada,200811,1950000.0,Training Grant,Operating Grants,Biomedical,"Neurosciences, Mental Health and Addiction",Cns - Immune Interactions; Cns Inflammation; Multidisciplinary; Multiple Sclerosis; Spinal Cord Injury,"Inflammation occurs as a response of the body to infections, injury or as an abnormal attack of the immune system against certain tissues or organs (autoimmune disease).  Neuroinflammation, which refers to inflammation occurring in the nervous system, is recognized as having negative or positive consequences in a variety of neurological disorders. Understanding the mechanisms underlying these inflammatory responses can lead to the development of novel therapies for various neurological conditions. Our Neuroinflammation Training Program is focused on (i) multiple sclerosis (MS), an autoimmune inflammatory disease of the nervous system that is particularly prevalent in Canada; (ii) spinal cord injury, and spinal mechanisms underlying pain; and (iii) the effects of maternal infections on brain development leading to schizophrenia. Our aim is to educate the next generation of neuroscientists and clinician scientists interested in neuroinflammation in these conditions to acquire a broad multidisciplinary knowledge and expertise in immunology, neuroscience, animal models, neuroimaging, pre-clinical translational work, clinical trials, epidemiology and health outcomes.  To this end we have assembled a diverse team of expert mentors from three Montreal area Universities - McGill University, Université de Montréal, and Université du Québec. This application is a renewal of a successful, on-going program, which currently has 106 trainees, 40% of whom were funded directly by this program in the form of studentship and fellowships. Our Program also provides travel awards. It also includes formal courses, and a variety of regular group meetings including monthly laboratory presentations, seminars, annual symposia and workshops. These activities have contributed to an excellent record of success in mentoring productive trainees with multidisciplinary knowledge and expertise in the area of neuroinflammation.",6 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=177024&lang=en
177025,"Subvention de formation des IRSC en recherche transdisciplinaire sur les interventions en santé publique: promotion, prévention et politiques publiques (4P)",Paradis  Gilles,"Paradis, Gilles; Bergeron, Pierre; Cox, John J; Deschesnes, Marthe; Fournier, Louise; Gauvin, Lise; Otis, Joanne; Rossignol, Michel; Tousignant, Pierre; Turgeon, Jean",McGill University,Qu&eacute;bec,Canada,200811,1950000.0,Training Grant,Operating Grants,Social / Cultural / Environmental / Population Health,Population and Public Health,Formation En Recherche; Politiques Publiques; Promotion De La Santé; Prévention; Santé Publique Et Des Populations,"La complexité des problèmes auxquels les autorités de santé publique (SP) et les autorités responsables des politiques et de l'organisation des services sociaux et de santé (POSSS) au Canada seront confrontés requière une amélioration de la capacité de recherche transdisciplinaire et du partage de connaissance.  Il manque une masse critique de chercheurs ayant les habiletés nécessaires en recherche en intervention pour générer les nouvelles connaissances requises et soutenir la prise de décision.  Nous proposons la poursuite du programme de formation entrepris en 2003 pour augmenter la capacité de réaliser des recherches directement utiles et applicables aux décideurs de SP et POSSS.  Nos objectifs sont d'inciter les étudiants à entreprendre une carrière de recherche en SP ou POSSS appliquée et de créer une communauté d'intérêt dans ce domaine; d'offrir aux étudiants des laboratoires de formation dans les milieux de pratique et de décision, et de favoriser l'adoption d'une vision large, éthique et transdisciplinaire à la formulation d'hypothèses, à la conception d'études, à l'analyse de données et à l'interprétation des résultats.  Pour ce faire, nous recruterons des étudiants au Ph. D. et au post-doctorat qui feront leurs travaux sur un sujet appliqué de recherche en intervention et sous la supervision directe d'un mentor et localisés dans les organisations formelles de SP ou POSSS.  Ils seront aussi exposés à un curriculum de formation complémentaire en recherche transdisciplinaire.  Nous avons réuni un groupe de mentors exceptionnels provenant de six universités québécoises et de 10 organisations de SP et POSSS qui offriront des opportunités de formation en recherche appliquée à des problèmes concrets et actuels de SP contribuant ainsi à augmenter la qualité et l'applicabilité des recherches et pour permettre la prise de décisions basée sur des évidences probantes.",6 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=177025&lang=en
177037,CIHR Training Grant in Population Intervention for Chronic Disease Prevention: A Pan Canadian Program,Cameron  Roy,"Cameron, Roy; Ferrence, Roberta G; Gotay, Carolyn C; Plotnikoff, Ronald C; Raine, Kim D; Riley, Barbara L",University of Waterloo (Ontario),Ontario,Canada,200811,1950000.0,Training Grant,Operating Grants,Social / Cultural / Environmental / Population Health,Population and Public Health,Cancer; Cardiovascular Disease; Chronic Disease Prevention; Diabetes; Experimental; Knowledge Exchange; Nutrition; Obesity; Physical Activity; Policy Research; Population Intervention; Qualitative; Quasi-Experimental; Tobacco,"Most chronic disease (cancer, heart disease, and diabetes) is preventable. But these diseases afflict millions of Canadians and strain the health care system. Leading Canadian researchers will train students to do studies that provide evidence needed by those responsible for developing policies designed to reduce the number of people with chronic disease in Canada, using approaches that will reduce disease rates as much as possible, as fast as possible. In supporting this training program, CIHR is contributing to the health of Canadians by advancing federal and provincial strategies for preventing cancer, heart disease and diabetes (and increasing physical activity, and healthy eating, while decreasing tobacco use and obesity) through policies and programs that change living conditions.   

Although we have developed scientific methods to study treatments (e.g., effectiveness of drugs) for individual people, we need to develop new methods to study ways to prevent disease in the entire population.  This training program will train the research leaders of tomorrow in doing research that will increase our ability to prevent disease in the population at large. Trainees from across Canada will work and learn together, so that they understand how to collaborate across fields to do studies that make a difference. They will learn by actually doing research, through a distance education course, web-conferencing and through an annual meeting.",6 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=177037&lang=en
177038,CIHR Global Health Research Capacity Strengthening Program (GHR-CAPS Program),Haddad  Slim,"Haddad, Slim; Fournier, Pierre; Pedersen, Duncan",Centre hospitalier de l'Universit&eacute; de Montr&eacute;al (CHUM),Qu&eacute;bec,Canada,200811,1790000.0,Training Grant,Operating Grants,Social / Cultural / Environmental / Population Health,Population and Public Health,Equity; Global Health Research; Graduate Students; New Investigators; Research Capacity Strengthening; Training Programme,"The GHR-CAPS Program builds on a partnership between the four Teasdale-Corti teams of Quebec and the Global Health Research Network (GHRN) of the Réseau de recherche en santé des populations du Québec. The research agenda of the teams is representative of the wide spectrum of themes that constitute global health: land use, environment and eco-system health (UQAM), mental health of populations exposed to organized violence and complex emergencies (McGill), foodborne, waterborne and zoonotic diseases (Laval), and vulnerability and equity in public policies and health systems (Montreal). The teams are led by established researchers and partners in Canada, Africa, Asia and Latin America and the Caribbean. The Canadian investigators collaborate closely with their partner investigators and knowledge users in low and middle income countries to ensure the effective translation of knowledge into sustainable and equitable health policies and practices. The GHR-CAPS program unites the four Teasdale-Corti teams on an integrated training platform. The overarching goal of the GHR-CAPS Program is to contribute to the production of an integrated ontological and methodological platform for global health research (GHR) through the establishment of an international network for GHR and capacity building in Quebec, Canada and selected low and middle income countries. The main objective of the GHR-CAPS Program is to strengthen research capacity in global health through an integrated and systemic approach. Examples of activities include: field fellowships, bursaries for students, partnership development grants, a GHR summer school, mentoring support, thematic seminars, and the development of a best practices guide for the training of future GHR leaders. We expect that the GHR-CAPS Program, implemented in complementarity with ongoing GHR-Teasdale-Corti, GHRN and FRSQ initiatives, will produce a significant and sustainable impact on the field of GHR in Canada and abroad.",6 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=177038&lang=en
177043,Subvention de formation des IRSC en évaluation et traitement des troubles de la mobilité et de la posture (Programme MENTOR),Labelle  Hubert B,"Labelle, Hubert B","Centre hospitalier universitaire Sainte-Justine (Montr&eacute;al, Qu&eacute;bec)",Qu&eacute;bec,Canada,200811,1050000.0,Training Grant,Operating Grants,Biomedical,Musculoskeletal Health and Arthritis,Appliquée; Apprentissage Actif; Arthrose; Cliniciens-Chercheurs; Compétences; Cycles Supérieurs; Déficits Neuromoteurs; Déformations; Fondamentale; Formation; Mentorat; Multidisciplinaire; Postdoctorat; Recherche; Recherche Clinique; Rigueur; Stagiaires; Transfert Et Application Des Connaissances; Traumatismes; Travail D'Équipe; Éthique; Évaluative,"Ce projet concerne spécifiquement le renouvellement du programme MENTOR, programme de formation à la recherche sur l'évaluation et les traitements des troubles de la mobilité et de la posture.  Ce programme a été mis sur pied en 2002 à la suite d'une subvention des IRSC dans le cadre de l'Initiative stratégique pour la formation dans le domaine de la santé. Grâce à cet octroi, le groupe de mentors à l'origine du programme a créé un environnement de formation enrichie qui favorise l'exposition à la recherche multi/interdisciplinaire, le travail d'équipe, l'utilisation des nouvelles technologies, le transfert et l'application des connaissances, le développement du sens critique et de la rigueur scientifique ainsi que la sensibilisation aux considérations éthiques. Depuis sa création, le programme a accueilli près de 75 stagiaires de tous les cycles d'études, du Canada ou d'ailleurs, provenant des sciences fondamentales, cliniques ou appliquées. Le programme a favorisé l'intégration de ces jeunes chercheurs et cliniciens-chercheurs dans des équipes de recherche multidisciplinaires et milieux industriels de pointe. Devant ce succès, les mentors souhaitent poursuivre leur mission qui est de former des chercheurs et cliniciens-chercheurs en mesure d'apporter des solutions pour améliorer la santé des canadiens. En effet, les troubles de la mobilité et de la posture affectent une proportion importante de la population. Or, il existe toujours une pénurie de personnel qualifié dans ce domaine. Une attention particulière sera donc accordée à la formation de stagiaires exceptionnels, en fin d'études doctorales et postdoctorales, et en voie de débuter une carrière scientifique, afin qu'ils s'intègrent rapidement et aisément dans différents milieux de recherche.",6 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=177043&lang=en
177053,CIHR Training Grant in Interdisciplinary Primary Health Care Research,Stewart  Moira A,"Stewart, Moira A",Western University (Ontario),Ontario,Canada,200811,1950000.0,Training Grant,Operating Grants,Health systems / services,Health Services and Policy Research,Chronic Disease Management; Health Services Research; Primary Health Care; Research Methods; Training; Transdisciplinary,"This is a one-year, national interdisciplinary research training program funded by the Canadian Institutes of Health Research (CIHR) with mentor representation from the disciplines of: Family Medicine, Nursing, Psychology, Social Work, Epidemiology, Pharmacy, Sociology and Interprofessional Education. This program will be of interest to graduate students or post-doctoral fellows from Canadian Universities (as well as mid-career clinicians) who are engaged in primary health care research regardless of their home discipline.  The program has an innovative curriculum (primary health care research skills and interdisciplinary theory and process) which includes: 1)An on-site 3 day symposium in May; 2) 2 on-line workshops on research methods or primary health care related topics; 3) 2 on-line interdisciplinary discussion groups including: a) Interdisciplinary Collaborative Team Development during which trainees present their research project to peers and receive transdisciplinary feedback and b) Interdisciplinary Grant Writing during which trainees work together in an interdisciplinary team to create a primary health care research proposal.  Students can remain at their home university/institution while participating in the on-line training.  This program will prepare health researchers in areas (e.g., health services, health human resources, chronic disease management, electronic medical records) relevant to primary health care.",6 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=177053&lang=en
177056,"CIHR Training Program in Reproduction, Early Development, and the Impact on Health (REDIH)",Baltz  Jay M,"Baltz, Jay M; Clarke, Hugh J; Dufort, Daniel; Foster, Warren G; Gibb, William; Gruslin, Andree M; Hales, Barbara F; Kidder, Gerald M; Leader, Arthur; Leveille, Marie-Claude; Liu, Johne X; Macdonald, Colla J; Mann, Mellissa; McDonald, Sarah D; Murphy, Bruce D; Nisker, Jeffrey A; Richard, François; Robaire, Bernard; Sirard, Marc-André; Smith, Lawrence C; Tanphaichitr, Nongnuj; Trasler, Jacquetta M; Tsang, Benjamin K; Vanderhyden, Barbara C; Wade, Michael G; Walker, Mark C; Watson, Andrew J; Wen, Shi Wu; Yang, Kaiping; Yang, Qiuying",Ottawa Hospital Research Institute,Ontario,Canada,200811,1787598.0,Training Grant,Operating Grants,Biomedical,"Human Development, Child and Youth Health",Development; Ethics; Maternal Fetal Health; Origins Of Disease; Reproduction; Training,"We propose a training program in Reproduction, Early Development, and the Impact on Health (REDIH). REDIH will be a collaborative training program across institutions in Quebec and Ontario, with mentors who are basic biomedical, clinical, population health, education, and ethics researchers. A main focus will be on very early development and how perturbations during gametogenesis, embryogenesis, and fetal development affect both health during development and the long-term health of offspring. A key emphasis will be on infertility and assisted reproduction technologies (ART), widely used in treating human infertility, and the effectiveness and safety of emerging technologies. The objective of REDIH will be to provide increased opportunities for excellent training in reproduction and early development for graduate students and fellows, to build research, clinical, regulatory, decision-making, and industry capacity in Canada. REDIH builds on three successful, collaborative, and interdisciplinary research networks that have been funded by CIHR Strategic Initiative program grants. Considerable added value will be provided by cross-program training modules in ethical/legal/social issues, training in knowledge translation including using a 360-degree model incorporating end users as well as teaching by recognized KT experts, semi-annual group meetings with a broad range of training modules, off-site workshops, and training opportunities provided in research groups outside that of the trainee's mentor and in clinical settings. An expertly-designed evaluation strategy will be embedded in REDIH. Canada has considerable, internationally-recognized expertise in this area of research, but needs additional capacity. Therefore, a cross-disciplinary training program such as REDIH, encompassing a wide range of methodologies including basic biomedical, clinical, population health, and ethical, legal and social science research, is needed.",6 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=177056&lang=en
177058,CIHR Training Grant for Enhancing Existing Capacity in Applied Health Services and Policy Research in Western Canada,Sheps  Samuel (Sam) B,"Sheps, Samuel (Sam) B; Backman, Allen M; Barer, Morris L; Casebeer, Ann; Doupe, Malcolm B; Kelly, Karen D; Lix, Lisa M; Marchildon, Gregory; Martens, Patricia J; Quan, Hude",University of British Columbia,British Columbia,Canada,200811,1790000.0,Training Grant,Operating Grants,Health systems / services,Health Services and Policy Research,Applied Health Services; Experiential Learning; Graduate Training; Interdisciplinary; Knowledge Translation,"The WRTC program objectives to be extended and expanded to three new university sites (University of Calgary, University of Saskatchewan and University of Regina) include: providing formal course based and experiential applied health services research training opportunities to equip researchers to address the research needs of a wide range of health-care policy makers; attracting graduate students from a broad range of disciplines, including health and non-health backgrounds;  involvement of decision-makers in all aspects of the training program; exposure of students to the interface of research and decision-making;  providing interdisciplinary conceptual and methods training; and developing linkages with other departments, and universities. This proposal will extend the number of core WRTC sites from three to six, adding diversity and strength to the WRTC training mission to enhance health services and policy research capacity in western Canada.",6 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=177058&lang=en
177061,CIHR Strategic Training Grant in the Development of Biological Therapeutics,Hampson  David R,"Hampson, David R",University of Toronto,Ontario,Canada,200811,1787630.0,Training Grant,Operating Grants,Biomedical,"Neurosciences, Mental Health and Addiction",Antibodies; Breast Cancer; Cancer; Developmental Neurobiology; Drug Delivery; Drug Metabolism; Epilepsy; G-Protein Coupled Receptors; Immune System; Immunity; Infection; Liposomes; Nervous System; Ocular; Oncongenes; Parkinson'S Disease; Peptides; Pharmaceuticals; Radiopharmaceuticals; Regeneration; Retinoblastoma; Rnai; Sirna; Stem Cells,"The use of nucleic acids such as DNA and RNA, peptides, proteins, and viruses is rapidly becoming a dominant facet of drug therapy.  The development, production, and use of peptides, proteins (including antibodies), small interfering RNAs, and viral-based vectors including RNAi for reducing or increasing the amounts of proteins in the body represents a new wave of pharmaceutical therapy that is applicable to both animal models of disease and human therapeutics.  The objective of this strategic training program is to bring together leaders in the fields of biological drug development in the Toronto research core to address a rapidly growing yet unmet need, namely to train young scientists in the design, development, and delivery of biologically-based medicines.  The emphasis will be on drug development and therapeutics, not diagnostics or biomarkers.  The program will encompass three major therapeutic areas of application: neuroscience/CNS, cancer, and infection and immunity.  The researchers (Mentors) in this proposed training program have laboratories based at the University of Toronto, the University Health Network including the Ontario Cancer Institute, MaRS, and the Toronto Western Research Institute.  Postdoctoral Fellows and graduate students will receive training in cutting edge techniques and tools such as bioinformatics, the use of RNAi, new methods and formulations for the delivery of nucleic acids and proteins, and the analysis of the metabolism and fate of these macromolecules (pharmacokinetics) in animal models of disease. 
      An attractive aspect of the proposed training program is the partnerships with pharmaceutical companies whereby selected graduate students and PDFs will spend 2 - 6 months working at a pharmaceutical company.  We already have agreements to participate from at least 8 pharmaceutical companies in Toronto and elsewhere and more companies are expected to sign on.",6 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=177061&lang=en
177110,Studies on the Development of Novel Carbohydrate Based Polymer Brushes and it's Interactions with Blood: Towards Biocompatible Blood Storage Devices,Yu  Kai,"Yu, Kai",University of British Columbia,British Columbia,Canada,200810,0.0,Fellowship - Priority Announcement: Transfusion Science,Fellowship Programs,Biomedical,Circulatory and Respiratory Health,Atomic Force Microscope; Biocompatiable Platelet Bags; Blood Storage; Carbohydrate Polymer Brushes; Protein Adsorption,"Compatibility of any surface brought in contact with blood depends on the response of the molecular and cellular defense systems that can potentially be activated by that interaction. The coagulation, complement, immune and inflammatory pathways can all be initiated as can platelet and white cell activation. The extent to which these occur depends on the detailed nature of the adsorption, specific binding or rejection reactions that occur at the material-blood interface. In this project we will develop new polymer brush systems based on carbohydrate based monomers to reduce protein adsorption, complement activation and platelet activation when the surfaces are exposed to blood in vitro. We will study the interaction of such well defined brush systems with blood protein solutions to try to define the physicochemical mechanisms that determine whether the brushes activate complement/coagulation by rejecting or adsorbing large molecules. We will do a systematic study of activation of coagulation, complement and platelets as function of features of brushes. We will work to develop and understand antithrombotic coatings utilizing carbohydrate based brush systems, as these could have multiple applications in blood handling and in device development.",2 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=177110&lang=en
177116,The genomic and nutritional origins of cardiovascular disease in South Asians,De Koning  A. B. Lawrence,"De Koning, A. B. Lawrence",University of Cambridge (UK),,United Kingdom,200810,150000.0,Fellowship Award - PA:  Population Genetics and Genetic Epidemiology,Fellowship Programs,Social / Cultural / Environmental / Population Health,Genetics,Cardiovascular Disease; Epigenetics; Ethnicity; Gene-Nutrient Interactions; Genetics; Genomics; Nutrition,"People from South Asia (India, Pakistan, Bangladesh and Sri Lanka) are at high risk for having a heart attack or stroke at an early age. Compared to white Europeans of the same body mass index, South Asians have more fat around their waists, higher blood cholesterol and a greater prevalence of diabetes. These are strong risk factors for cardiovascular disease, and while it is not entirely clear why these differences exist, unique genetic factors and lifestyle factors may play important roles. South Asians and several other ethnic groups are believed to possess an efficient genetic makeup that causes fat to be stored more easily than in other groups. This so called ""thrifty genotype"" is thought to be an advantage for surviving famine, but a disadvantage in an urban environment where physical activity is uncommon and food is plentiful. South Asians also consume a diet high in simple carbohydrates, which is known to promote obesity and diabetes. Understanding the relative importance of these factors is the major goal of my research. I am interested in discovering the genetic variation (inherited changes in DNA) that is related to the occurrence of cardiovascular disease in this population, but also the dietary factors that pre-dispose South Asians to high risk. My research also seeks to uncover whether the negative effects of diet are enhanced by genetic variation. For example if a group of genetic variants is found to pre-disposes South Asians to obesity, it might be expected that a high carbohydrate diet would increase risk more in these individuals compared to those without the variants. This research has important implications for Canada, where South Asians make up approximately one quarter of all visibile minorities (1.3 million people), but also the world where they make up nearly one fifth (1.5 billion people) of the global population.",3 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=177116&lang=en
177119,Functional genomic approach for genome-wide determination of cis-regulatory variants underlying genetic sysceptibility to common disease,Verlaan  Dominique J,"Verlaan, Dominique J",Research Institute of the McGill University Health Centre,Qu&eacute;bec,Canada,200810,135000.0,Fellowship Award - PA:  Population Genetics and Genetic Epidemiology,Fellowship Programs,Biomedical,Genetics,1m Illumina Infinium Array; Allelic Specific Expression; Beadarray System; Cis-Eqtl; Complex Traits; Fibroblast Cell Culture; Genomics; Gwas,"While highly penetrant rare mutations causing monogenic disease are typically altering protein structure, common complex disorders such as type 2 diabetes, arthritis and cancers are thought to be caused by a complex combination of genetic and environmental factors, with each genetic variant modifying the risk of obtaining the disease. Only recently high-density genome wide association studies (GWAS) have provided a successful, systematic and unbiased approach for complex disease risk discovery. GWAS hits to date are providing evidence that regulatory variation accounts for a considerable proportion of risk alleles observed for chronic disease risk since coding variants have been ruled out in over half of the loci. Although the SNPs delineated by GWAS may be used to help identify people with an increased disease risk, full exploitation of the new risk genes require the identification of the causative SNPs to understand disease mechanisms allowing their targeting by novel treatment strategies.
In this study, we propose to detect and map cis-variation in primary human fibroblasts, in regions identified in published GWAS, by measuring the relative expression of each gene allele. Allelic imbalance (AI) will be determined using the novel Illumina BeadArray system and cells will be genotyped using the Illumina Infinium chip. Disease associated regulatory haplotypes, defined by the AI, will then be further followed by us and our collaborators using re-sequencing, fine-mapping, bioinformatics predictions and functional validation of candidate regulatory variants. Ultimately, the identification of susceptibility genetic variants in common diseases will provide a functional basis of disease for pharmacogenetic association, will permit the development of genetic tests to confirm medical diagnostics and will, furthermore, greatly help in our understanding of disease pathogenesis.",3 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=177119&lang=en
177120,Organisation des services d'ergothérapie au domicile des aînés qui ont de la difficulté à se laver.,Guay  Manon,"Guay, Manon",Universit&eacute; de Sherbrooke,Qu&eacute;bec,Canada,200810,165000.0,Fellowship Award - Mobility in Aging,Fellowship Programs,Clinical,Aging,Accès Aux Services; Ergothérapie; Hygiène Personnelle; Outil Clinique; Personnel Auxiliaire; Perte D'Autonomie; Salle De Bain; Services À Domicile; Validité; Équipements,"Dans les sociétés modernes, se laver est considéré comme une activité essentielle. Or, 31 % des aînés vivant à domicile ont des difficultés à prendre leur bain et une personne âgée sur sept qui a des difficultés à sortir de sa baignoire y restera coincée au moins à une occasion. Dans ces situations, l'ergothérapeute est l'expert pour évaluer les causes des problèmes rencontrés et, le cas échéant, recommander l'ajout d'équipements au bain ou à la douche. Cependant, les ergothérapeutes ne suffisent plus à la tâche considérant la pénurie de ressources humaines et la croissance des demandes de services. Les aînés font donc face à des délais d'attente importants, ce qui n'est pas sans risque pour eux et leurs proches. Dans ce contexte, et afin de favoriser l'accès aux services, des cliniciens ont développé un outil de travail pour que du personnel auxiliaire, moins formé que l'ergothérapeute, rencontre certaines catégories d'aînés. Ce projet de recherche vise à valider que l'auxiliaire aux services de santé et sociaux qui utilise une grille d'observation, inspirée de l'algorithme « Préalables aux soins d'hygiène », recommande les bons équipements qui permettent aux aînés de se laver en toute sécurité (ex. barre d'appui et siège de bain). Pour ce faire, des cliniciens et des experts québécois jugeront du contenu de cette grille. Puis, 149 aînés seront rencontrés à la fois par un ergothérapeute et par une auxiliaire qui utilise la grille. Leurs recommandations seront ensuite comparées. Un niveau d'accord inacceptable entre les deux intervenants remettrait en question la pertinence de recourir à du personnel auxiliaire au lieu de l'ergothérapeute lors de l'identification du besoin d'équipements dans la salle de bain. Par contre, des résultats concluants encourageraient l'implantation de la grille dans les milieux cliniques, ce qui favoriserait l'accès de la population canadienne à des services de qualité et sécuritaires.",3 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=177120&lang=en
177121,A Multi-Site Randomized Control Trial of the Impact of Assistive Technology on Individuals with Stroke and on their Caregivers,Mortenson  William B,"Mortenson, William B",Universit&eacute; de Montr&eacute;al,Qu&eacute;bec,Canada,200810,165000.0,Fellowship Award - Mobility in Aging,Fellowship Programs,Clinical,Aging,Assistive Technology; Care-Givers; Intervention Study; Mixed Methods; Stroke,"Many people develop physical disabilities as the result of stroke. Mobility assistive technology, which includes devices such as wheelchairs and bathroom grab bars, helps facilitate participation among these individuals. Although many of these individuals receive assistance from others, scant attention has been paid to the impact of this assistive technology on caregivers. This neglect produces an incomplete portrayal of the benefits of assistive technology, which has significant implications for policy and practice. In order to address this deficiency an experiment will be undertaken that evaluates the effect of an assistive technology updating and tune-up intervention on individuals with stroke and on their caregivers. This intervention involves a detailed in-home assessment of the subject's current assistive technology. This is followed by negotiation and implementation of a personal assistive technology plan with the subjects and their caregivers. We expect this intervention will 1) increase the mobility, well-being, and satisfaction with personal assistance of the individuals with stroke; 2) reduce the amount of caregiver assistance required; and 3) decrease the psychological demands on care givers and increase their satisfaction with caregiving related activities. 72 individuals with stroke and 72 caregivers will be enrolled in the study. Participants will be assigned to either an immediate intervention group or a delayed intervention group.  Outcomes of this assistive technology treatment for individuals with stroke and their caregivers will be measured before and after intervention using a variety of standardized instruments. The evidence produced by this study will enable service providers to offer assistive technology interventions that are more attuned to the needs of both individuals with stroke and their caregivers. It will allow them to lobby for better funding for equipment and follow-up intervention services.",3 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=177121&lang=en
177127,"CIHR Training Grant in Women, Gender, and Addictions: Exploring Intersections with Trauma, Violence and Mental Health (IMPART: Intersections of Mental Health Perspectives in Addictions Research Training)",Greaves  Lorraine J,"Greaves, Lorraine J","Centre of Excellence for Women's Health (Vancouver, BC)",British Columbia,Canada,200811,1950000.0,Training Grant,Operating Grants,Social / Cultural / Environmental / Population Health,"Neurosciences, Mental Health and Addiction",Addictions; Mental Health; Sex- And Gender-Based Analysis; Transdisciplinarity; Trauma; Violence,"Building on the strengths of the current IMPART, which focuses on training in transdisciplinary research on women, gender and addictions, the new IMPART will also directly address the intersections of addictions and substance use with mental health, violence and trauma.  The program will provide a transdisciplinary context, including all 4 pillars of health research, plus policy, for a range of trainees.  Training will consist of mentorship, learning plans, research projects, an online course in the core concepts, monthly seminars, an annual research day, and student-driven, transdisciplinary collaborative projects.  The goal of the program will be to enhance the capacity of researchers in BC in applying a gendered approach to the study of addictions and its intersections with mental health, trauma, and violence.  IMPART will result in increased knowledge and appreciation of the complexities and breadth of these issues in women and men, girls and boys that can be applied nationally and internationally.",6 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=177127&lang=en
177128,A physiotherapy triage assessment in patients referred to orthopedic surgeons for low back-related complaints: outcomes and predictors of success,Bath  Brenna L,"Bath, Brenna L",University of Saskatchewan,Saskatchewan,Canada,200810,128334.0,Fellowship - Priority Announcement: Knowledge Translation,Fellowship Programs,Health systems / services,Health Services and Policy Research,Clinical Epidemiology; Differential Diagnosis; Health Care Utilization; Low Back Pain; Multivariate Analysis; Musculoskeletal; Physiotherapy; Primary Health Care,"Back pain is the second leading reason for family physician visits in Canada and people with back pain use significantly more health care resources each year than those without back pain.People with a variety of low back problems make up a large proportion of referrals made to orthopedic surgeons and many of these patients are not considered to be surgical candidates or have not fully explored non-surgical treatment options.This can contribute significantly to wait times for patients to consult with a surgeon and ultimately lead to greater wait times for other types of orthopedic surgeries.To date,very little research has explored alternative models of health care to help manage this problem. An assessment service performed by physiotherapists with advanced orthopedic training for people with low back problems referred to one of three orthopedic surgeons has been operating at a Saskatoon based rehabilitation clinic since 2003.However,the impact of this process on patient relevant outcomes and on patient and referring practitioner satisfaction is unknown.The purposes of this study are to determine:1)the impact of a physiotherapy triage assessment on patient self-reported function and quality of life and patient and referring practitioner satisfaction,2) which factors predict improved self-reported function,quality of life and patient and referring practitioner satisfaction and,3)how consistent physiotherapists and orthopedic surgeons are at diagnosing low back related problems.In addition, how patient characteristics such as age, gender, income, access to health care, and the presence of other health problems affect outcomes will be considered.The results of this study will assist Canadian health care providers, health care managers and policy makers to determine which patients benefit most from undergoing this type of assessment and will lead to more efficient management of people with low back related problems.",2 yrs 4 mths,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=177128&lang=en
177130,Development of an Evidence Based Knowledge Translation Plan for the Canadian Assessment of Tomography for Childhood Health Injury (CATCH) Rule,Curran  Janet,"Curran, Janet",Ottawa Hospital Research Institute,Ontario,Canada,200810,115000.0,Fellowship - Priority Announcement: Knowledge Translation,Fellowship Programs,Health systems / services,Health Services and Policy Research,Clinical Decision Rules; Cognitive Behaviour Models; Implementation Research; Knowledge Transfer/Translation; Minor Head Injury; Pediatric Emergency Medicine,"Background: Minor head injuries in children result in over 650,000 emergency department visits annually. Computed tomography (CT) scan is the most effective method for detecting a life-threatening intracranial hematoma. However, only 5% of children presenting with minor head injury have acute injury on CT. While there is variation in the use of CT scans for children who present with minor head injury in pediatric emergency departments, the overall trend is rising. The number of CT scans for this population has increased from 15% to 53% in the past 10 years with approximately 95% of the scans being negative. Radiology studies suggest that pediatric CTs result in an increased lifetime radiation risk and an increased lifetime cancer mortality risk. The Canadian Assessment of Tomography for Childhood Head Injury (CATCH) Rule was derived from a study of 3867 children and is currently being validated in a Canada wide multicentre cohort study. The CATCH rule will improve diagnostic and therapeutic decision making for children presenting with minor head injury. However, failure to translate research findings into routine practice is a common finding in the health services literature, therefore widespread uptake of the rule will require an effective implementation strategy. Aim: Development of an evidence based knowledge translation (KT) strategy for the CATCH Rule. Methods: This project will be conducted in three phases. First, we will explore clinician non-adherence to the rule in a previously conducted adult CT Head Rule trial. Second, we will identify barriers to the uptake of the CATCH rule with a sample of rural and urban emergency clinicians. Finally, intervention mapping will guide selection of appropriate behavior change techniques to address identified barriers. Feasability testing will also be carried out with a cohort of emergency clinicians in Ontario. This evidence based KT strategy will inform design of a multicentre trial for implementation of the CATCH rule.",2 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=177130&lang=en
177136,Incorporating laboratory-based measures of compensatory postural control into the clinical setting,Sibley  Kathryn M,"Sibley, Kathryn M",Toronto Rehabilitation Institute-UHN,Ontario,Canada,200810,135000.0,Fellowship - Priority Announcement: Knowledge Translation,Fellowship Programs,Biomedical,Aging,Assessment; Balance; Fall Prevention; Knowledge Translation; Older Adults; Physiotherapy; Postural Control,"Falls are a significant concern for older adults, which occur when the neuromuscular system is not able to successfully recover when thrown off balance. There is currently a lack of appropriate clinical tools for assessing the ability to perform balance recovery, largely due to traditional reliance on laboratory-based techniques to measure these extremely rapid reactions. Healthcare clinicians need to be able to objectively assess postural recovery in order to fully understand balance abilities and to prescribe appropriate treatment if needed. The objective of this work is to address the gap between the basic and clinical measurement of compensatory postural using embedded Knowledge Translation (KT) strategies. The purpose of doing so is to encourage the uptake of objective balance assessment in clinical practice. This objective will be realized in three phases. (i) Firstly, focus groups with clinicians will probe the perceived barriers associated with implementing laboratory-based measures. (ii) These findings will be incorporated into the development of a clinical assessment of compensatory balance tool, which will then be evaluated for feasibility with clinicians. (iii) Finally, following revision of the assessment based on clinical perspectives, it will undergo reliability and validity testing in comparison to traditional laboratory measures. Incorporating current practice with physiological evidence and addressing perceived barriers when developing the clinical balance assessment should facilitate uptake of the tool, thus advancing treatment planning and ultimately, more effectively reduce risk of falling.",3 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=177136&lang=en
177139,Fragile X Mental Retardation Protein interacts with Rac GTPase to control synaptic growth and function.,Ball  Robin W,"Ball, Robin W",McGill University,Qu&eacute;bec,Canada,200810,45000.0,Fellowship Award - Priority Announcement: Fragile X (SHOPP),Fellowship Programs,Biomedical,"Neurosciences, Mental Health and Addiction",Drosophila; Electrophysiology; Fluorescence Imaging; Fragile X; Genetics; Neuromuscular Junction; Plasticity; Rac Gtpase; Synaptic Development,"Fragile X Syndrome is the most common inherited form of mental retardation.  It is caused by mutations in a single gene called fmr.  The normal product of this gene, the Fragile X Mental Retardation Protein (FMRP), acts as a master regulator of many other proteins by inhibiting their synthesis.  Thus, in individuals with Fragile X Syndrome, proteins that are normally kept at certain, low levels become overabundant, which can have toxic effects.  The particular proteins that are regulated by FMRP are still being investigated, as well as how these misregulated targets lead to the symptoms of Fragile X Syndrome.  We are interested in studying this disease in more detail, by using a disease model in Drosophila fruit flies.  Drosophila are a good model system for human diseases because they have the same cellular pathways as humans but are much simpler and easier to work with than mammals.  Drosophila also has the fmr gene and when it is mutated, it causes defects in the growth and function of synapses between motor neurons and muscle, termed neuromuscular junctions (NMJs).  It has been shown in other systems that FMRP regulates Rac GTPase, which is an important signaling protein that is involved in many cellular processes that control cellular morphology and movement.  We have found that Rac is important for controlling the proper development of NMJs.  If you have too much Rac (as would happen in Fragile X Syndrome) the synapses grow out of control and are hyperexcitable.  Through genetic studies we have discovered that Rac and FMRP do indeed interact at the NMJ and control synaptic growth.  We are now poised to dissect the mechanism of how exactly FMRP regulates Rac signaling and how this leads to changes in the growth and function of neuronal synapses.  Learning more about the basics of FMRP function will hopefully lead to new avenues for medical treatment of Fragile X Syndrome.",2 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=177139&lang=en
177140,Can deficits in Fragile X syndrome be corrected early in development by targeting a novel AMPA receptor?,Chong  Mabel,"Chong, Mabel",McGill University,Qu&eacute;bec,Canada,200810,67500.0,Fellowship Award - Priority Announcement: Fragile X (SHOPP),Fellowship Programs,Biomedical,"Neurosciences, Mental Health and Addiction",Bdnf Signaling Pathway; Calcium-Permeable Ampa Receptors; Cerebellum; Development; Experience Dependent Plasticity; Fmr1 Knockout Mouse; Fragile X Syndrome; Pathophysiology,"Understanding the genetic, molecular and physiological interactions underlying neurological disorders is essential to the development of effective therapeutic strategies.  In this regard, the goal of our study is to identify molecular and functional deficits in the brain during early postnatal development in the mouse model of Fragile X syndrome.   Fragile X syndrome is the second most common form of mental retardation affecting the world's population, afflicting children with behavioural and cognitive deficits at an early age.  Unlike previous studies that have looked at the consequences of the fragile X mutation in the adult mouse brain, we have identified for the first time a novel form of glutamate receptor plasticity triggered early in postnatal development.  This developmental time window occurs at the same time that Fragile X symptoms appear in mutant mice.  We hypothesize that brains of fragile X mice lack this novel form of synaptic plasticity, a mechanism implicated in learning behaviours.  We also plan to rescue this brain deficit in fragile X mice by targeting a molecular signaling pathway that triggers onset of this novel plasticity mechanism.  The results of this project have the potential to create a therapeutic approach that reverses the onset of Fragile X syndrome in children well before cognitive impairment emerges.  Prevention of such an impairment in these children can greatly increase their quality of life and those of their families as well as providing a level of independence in adulthood that they could not attain otherwise.",3 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=177140&lang=en
177141,Does atypical sleep architecture underlie neuronal disruption in the Fragile-X brain?,Fay  Anne-Marie L,"Fay, Anne-Marie L",McGill University,Qu&eacute;bec,Canada,200810,67500.0,Fellowship Award - Priority Announcement: Fragile X (SHOPP),Fellowship Programs,Biomedical,"Neurosciences, Mental Health and Addiction",Autism; Cognitive Impairment; Electroencephalography; Fragile-X Syndrome; Glutamate Receptors; Knock-Out Mice Model; Rem Sleep; Slice Electrophysiology; Synapse Maturation; Thalamocortical Synapse,"Fragile-X syndrome (FXS) is the most common inherited cause of mental retardation and the most frequent known genetic cause of autism. Individuals affected with FXS show cognitive and social skill deficits as well as unusual stereotypical behaviors such as hand-wringing. A growing body of evidence suggests that people with autism frequently display atypical sleeping architecture. Although, long-term sleep disruption most likely contributes to the pathology of FXS, it has yet to be examined systematically. We propose to investigate the relationship between sleep architecture and changes in the brain activity. Sleep is thought to be the price we have to pay for the intense brain activity that occurs during wakefulness. Moreover, sleep plays an important part in memory formation and in ensuring proper maturation of brain cells. In contrast, the FXS brain exhibits immature brain cells, which are thought to underlie the cognitive problems in FXS. Taken together, this information provides a compelling argument for examining the relationship between sleep and synaptic activity in FXS. Moreover, recent work has shown that, at least in the FXS mouse model, FXS symptoms can be reversed by administration of the MPEP drug. MPEP decreases the activity the mGluR5 receptor protein, which is found on the surface of brain cells and plays an important role in allowing brain cells to communicate with each other. As yet, the effect of MPEP on sleep has yet to be examined, but we expect it to restore proper sleep architecture as well as brain activity. To examine this, we will look at the effect of MPEP on sleep architecture and brain activity using electrical measurements of brain activity as well as video for behavior testing of the FXS mouse model compared to control littermates. Since the FXS brain shows immature brain development, correcting an imbalance in sleep architecture may provide a novel therapeutic approach in rectifying brain disruptions that are the hallmark of FXS.",3 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=177141&lang=en
177144,Characterization of Fanconi Anemia and a FA genetic network in C. elegans: A model for  developing Fanconi Anemia therapeutic targets,Jones  Martin R,"Jones, Martin R",University of British Columbia,British Columbia,Canada,200810,67500.0,Fellowship - Priority Announcement: Fanconi Anemia (SHOPP),Fellowship Programs,Biomedical,Cancer Research,C. Elegans; Cancer Research; Chromosomal Instability; Comparative Genomics; Fancj; Fanconi Anaemia; Human Health; Rnai Screen,"Fanconi Anemia (FA) is a genetic disease characterized by a predisposition to develop anemia and cancer. To learn more about how Fanconi Anemia develops and to identify new therapies, we are studying the genes responsible for FA in a simple organism, Caenorhabditis elegans. C. elegans is a nematode worm and has many of the same genes as humans. The worm has proven to be extremely useful in studying diseases that affect people as the worm has many of the same biological processes and genes. By studying how worm FA genes function, we can learn a lot that is relevant to FA and FA therapy in humans. 
My proposed research has two major aims. 1) I will study FA gene mutations in the worm to gain a better understanding of the biological role of FA genes in the development of anemia and cancer. The worm has many of the key genes associated with Fanconi Anemia in humans and mutations of these genes results in consequences similar to those observed in FA patients. The research tools available to study the worm will allow me to investigate the results of these FA mutations in a whole live organism. Previous work in my lab, led to the discovery that the worm FA protein, FANCJ/DOG-1, unwinds problematic DNA sequences. This was a very important finding and has been shown to be true in human cells. 2) I will use the worm to look for other genes that could be targeted to specifically kill FA tumour cells. These would be genes that when disrupted kill FA tumour cells but not normal cells. These FA-lethal genes would be excellent therapeutic targets for the development of novel drugs to kill FA and non-FA tumours. 
In summary, this research will add to the understanding of how disrupting FA genes compromises the mechanisms which maintain genomic stability and prevent tumour formation. This knowledge, combined with screens to identify new targets for development of therapeutics, will advance our understanding of FA and our ability to develop treatments for FA derived tumours.",3 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=177144&lang=en
177156,"Effet d'un programme de dépistage, de prévention et de réadaptation précoce sur les troubles musculosquelettiques associés au travail chez les pompiers.",Roy  Jean-S&eacute;bastien,"Roy, Jean-Sébastien",McMaster University,Ontario,Canada,200810,82500.0,Fellowship - PA: Clinical Research,Fellowship Programs,Clinical,Musculoskeletal Health and Arthritis,Dépistage; Exercices; Incapacités; Prévention; Réadaptation; Santé Au Travail; Tendinite; Traumatismes; Troubles Musculosquelettiques; Étude De Cohorte,"Le travail de pompier est physiquement exigeant. Les pompiers doivent manipuler des charges importantes, dans des situations d'urgence au cours desquelles l'espace de travail est souvent restreint. De plus, leur travail les expose à des situations d'alternance entre des périodes d'inactivité et d'activités intenses. Ces facteurs font que la prévalence des atteintes musculosquelettiques (MS) est élevée chez les pompiers. Les études démontrent que le dépistage et la prévention sont efficaces pour diminuer la prévalence des atteintes MS. Toutefois, l'efficacité de ces interventions est peu documentée pour les emplois exigeants comme celui des pompiers. Ainsi, l'objectif de l'étude sera d'évaluer l'impact d'une intervention comprenant dépistage, prévention et réadaptation précoce sur la santé au travail des pompiers. Trois cents pompiers seront recrutés. Ils seront tout d'abord évalués par un physiothérapeute afin de dépister les atteintes MS. Les pompiers qui présenteront une atteinte MS seront référés à une équipe de réadaptation pour une intervention précoce. Par la suite, ils participeront à un module de prévention, qui leur permettra d'observer sur vidéo des situations de travail à risque afin d'obtenir des conseils pour diminuer les possibilités de blessures au travail. De plus, un programme de conditionnement physique et de renforcement musculaire sera mis à leur disposition. Les variables qui seront utilisées pour évaluer l'effet de l'intervention comprennent les connaissances acquises à la suite du module de prévention et les limitations au travail (initialement, et 1 an après l'intervention), toutes deux évaluées à l'aide de questionnaires. Compte tenu de la prévalence élevée des atteintes MS chez cette population, nous croyons important d'évaluer le potentiel de cette intervention. Si les résultats s'avèrent positifs, nous pourront présenter ce programme à d'autres groupes de pompiers et ainsi améliorer leur santé et la sécurité de leur travail.",1 yr 6 mths,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=177156&lang=en
177169,Clinical and sociodemographic predictors of hospitalization for acute complications in adults with type 1 diabetes mellitus.,Butalia  Sonia,"Butalia, Sonia",University of Calgary,Alberta,Canada,200810,165000.0,Fellowship - PA: Clinical Research,Fellowship Programs,Clinical,"Nutrition, Metabolism and Diabetes",Acute Complications; Administrative Data; Health Services Research; Type 1 Diabetes Mellitus,"Diabetes is a serious and growing public health problem in Canada.  Complications of diabetes are common, costly, and associated with significant risk for premature death or disability.   The acute complications of type 1 diabetes (previously known as ""Juvenile Diabetes"") can occur when blood sugar is extremely high or low.  Such complications are called diabetic ketoacidosis (DKA, severely elevated blood sugar) and hypoglycemia (extremely low blood sugar) and are both potentially fatal.   There is some information available that describes the characteristics of children with type 1 diabetes who are at high risk for such complications, however little is known about the characteristics of adults with type 1 diabetes that present with these complications. Being able to identify adult patients at risk is extremely important so that health care providers can intervene to prevent these serious complications. 
     Our study will identify adult patients with type 1 diabetes that have been admitted to hospitals in a large urban centre and compare their characteristics to other patients with type 1 diabetes that have not had these complications.
     This information will inform clinicians, health care professionals, and medical researchers of individuals at high risk for acute complications and could lead to interventions that would prevent these complications and improve health outcomes.",3 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=177169&lang=en
177171,Predictors of Healthy Cognitive Aging in the Oldest Old,Middleton  Laura E,"Middleton, Laura E",University of California (San Francisco),California,United States of America,200810,150000.0,Fellowship - Priority Announcement - Longitudinal Study on Aging,Fellowship Programs,Social / Cultural / Environmental / Population Health,Aging,Aging; Cognitive Impairment; Cognitive Performance; Dementia; Prevention; Risk Factors,"People aged 85 years or older are the fastest growing segment of the population, described as the ""oldest old"". Up to 50% of oldest old have Alzheimer's disease and more have other forms of dementia. Although the incidence of dementia increases with age, it is not an unavoidable part of aging. Some people maintain cognitive health despite extreme age. However, there is little research to indicate the factors that are most likely to lead to dementia or, alternatively, healthy cognitive aging in the oldest old. If we can identify lifestyle and other factors that are associated with the healthy cognitive aging, we may be able to develop interventions to maintain cognitive health in people who are at high risk of cognitive impairment based on age alone. 

In these studies, we will examine how lifestyle variables and physiological indicators are associated with the risk of cognitive impairment in the oldest old. With the results of these studies, we aim to develop strategies to prevent or treat dementia in the oldest old.",3 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=177171&lang=en
177180,REPETITIVE TRANSCRANIAL MAGNETIC STIMULATION (rTMS) IN TREATMENT- RESISTANT LATE-LIFE DEPRESSION,Blumberger  Daniel M,"Blumberger, Daniel M",Centre for Addiction and Mental Health (Toronto),Ontario,Canada,200810,110000.0,Fellowship Award - Aging,Fellowship Programs,Clinical,"Neurosciences, Mental Health and Addiction",Late-Life Depression; Randomized-Controlled Clinical Trial; Transcranial Magnetic Stimulation,"Depression is the most common treatable mental disorder in late life. When left untreated, late-life depression (LLD) amplifies disability, hastens functional and cognitive decline, increases hospitalizations and diminishes quality of life. Current treatments for LLD provide modest efficacy and it is estimated that up to 84% of individuals treated for LLD either do not respond to treatment or respond and then relapse. Several studies have demonstrated that repetitive transcranial magnetic stimulation (rTMS) is an efficacious treatment for treatment-resistant depression (TRD) in younger adults. This form of treatment involves a series of magnetic pulses directed to the brain at a frequency of 1-20 stimulations per second. There are very few studies that have evaluated rTMS in late-life.  Moreover, these studies are limited by suboptimal stimulation parameters. Therefore, we propose to assess the efficacy of rTMS in TRLLD using optimized parameters. First, we will use bilateral rTMS, one of the most promising paradigms in rTMS treatment studies that has yet to be studied in an elderly population. Second, we will use stimulation intensities that account for age-related brain changes. Third, we will use MRI co-registration to more accurately target rTMS to the area of the brain involved in depression. Fourth, we will extend the treatment duration to up to 6 weeks. We also intend to assess the impairment in complex cognition associated with LLD. These impairments add to functional disability and predict treatment resistance. The neurobiological basis of these impairments are not fully understood. Using neurophysiological tests from our lab we will measure this cognitive domain and how it is effected by rTMS.  Therefore, we hope to determine whether rTMS treatment can improve resistant depressive symptoms and gain a better understanding of the biological basis of complex cognitive impairments in LLD.",2 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=177180&lang=en
177201,"Use of healthcare across care settings in the last year of life in Ontario, Canada: Where do Ontarians receive palliative care?",Seow  Hsien-Yeang,"Seow, Hsien-Yeang",University of Toronto,Ontario,Canada,200810,90000.0,Fellowship Award - Aging,Fellowship Programs,Health systems / services,Aging,Administrative Data; Aging; Delivery Of Care; End-Of-Life Care; Health Services Research; Healthcare Utilization; Ontario; Palliative Care; Quality Of Care; Settings Of Care,"Research has shown that healthcare costs are often highest in the last year of life, mostly due to hospitalizations. However little is known about the patterns of healthcare service use in the last year of life. This study aims to examine the various places of care and the healthcare services used in the last year of life for a sample of Ontarians. In particular, the study aims to investigate whether receiving palliative care--care aimed at improving quality of life and managing symptoms--reduces the use of hospital services by varying diseases and places of care. The study will link multiple administrative databases collected by the Canadian Institutes of Health Information and the Ministry of Health, such as homecare, hospitalization, physician billing and drug benefit databases to identify the types of services used, in various places of care, in the year prior to death. Outcomes of interest include the amount of hospitalizations per patient, and whether these vary by place of care, diagnosis, and amounts of healthcare and palliative care services used. Understanding how those at the end-of-life use healthcare services can help decision-makers allocate resources efficiently so as to improve palliative care services, prevent unnecessary use of hospital services and develop a healthcare system that meets the needs of the sickest Ontarians.",2 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=177201&lang=en
177221,"Comprehensive intervention strategies with young HIV-positive women in Canada: individual, social, and cultural factors that make sexual health promotion programs successful.",Fielden  Sarah J,"Fielden, Sarah J",Universit&eacute; du Qu&eacute;bec &agrave; Montr&eacute;al,Qu&eacute;bec,Canada,200810,135000.0,Fellowship - PA: Health Services/Population Health HIV/AIDS Research,Fellowship Programs,Social / Cultural / Environmental / Population Health,"Human Development, Child and Youth Health",Adolescents; Evaluation; Family; Food Security; Gender; Hiv/Aids; Intervention Mapping; Prevention; Qualitative Methods; Sexual Health,"Despite extensive global efforts to combat HIV/AIDS through prevention, treatment, and care services, HIV infection rates continue to rise and approximately 25% of new infections are among young people. Young women are especially vulnerable to infection due to developmental, biological, social, and cultural factors contributing to the feminization of the pandemic. Research that extends beyond behavioural models of sexual health promotion is urgently needed to help curb the spread of HIV and provide support and care for those already living with HIV/AIDS. This proposed research is Pan-Canadian and aims to both develop and evaluate innovative sexual health interventions with HIV-positive young women. Given evidence of the multiplicity of factors impacting on health and wellness outcomes for women living with HIV, the objectives of the study include examining social and community influences. As a qualitative program of research, this work will enhance the understanding of developing successful interventions with groups of marginalized young women through using qualitative and community-based methodologies. This will involve combining various qualitative methods including naturalistic observation and in-depth interviews with young women and other key stakeholders such as family members and service providers. It will use intervention mapping, a step-wise systematic method of determining relevant stakeholders, community needs, program directions, and evaluation. The proposed research explores and addresses support and service needs of young women living with HIV in various geographic and cultural communities as it relates to their sexual health. In addition to the development of theoretically and empirically-based interventions, the project will serve to illicit cultural knowledge including understandings about the daily experiences of these young women in relation to their medical institutions, community-based services, and family systems.",3 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=177221&lang=en
177224,HIV/AIDS in settings of disaster and emergency: an investigation of policy and ethics frameworks to guide health care practice,Hunt  Matthew,"Hunt, Matthew",McMaster University,Ontario,Canada,200810,135000.0,Fellowship - PA: Health Services/Population Health HIV/AIDS Research,Fellowship Programs,Social / Cultural / Environmental / Population Health,Population and Public Health,Bioethics; Global Health; Health Policy; Hiv/Aids; Humanitarian Emergencies; Natural Disasters,"The HIV/AIDS pandemic continues to have catastrophic effects on communities and populations around the world.  In many affected regions it is a source of unparalleled morbidity and mortality.  HIV/AIDS has now been labeled a humanitarian emergency and massive resources have been mobilized for 'AIDS relief' in many low and middle-income countries (LMICs).  There remain significant and varied obstacles to the provision of effective treatment and prevention programs globally.  The challenge of treatment and prevention is amplified in regions that have experienced a humanitarian emergency or natural disaster.  Humanitarian crises result in instability of security, population migration, and heightened vulnerability for individuals and communities. Health care professionals who work for humanitarian medical organizations are frequently involved in providing testing and treatment for HIV/AIDS in crisis settings, as well as initiating programs to prevent disease transmission. In the course of these activities, complex ethical challenges arise for clinicians. In the present inquiry, I will examine organizational, interagency and intergovernmental policies, as well as codes and guidelines, that aim to guide HIV/AIDS-related interventions in crisis settings. I will evaluate normative and legal dimensions of these guidelines and policies. A core objective of this research will be to develop an ethics framework that responds to this domain of health practice, and is applicable for orienting policies that seek to guide practitioners and organizations.",3 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=177224&lang=en
177230,Elite controllers: A natural model of a controlled HIV infection?,Lajoie  Julie,"Lajoie, Julie",University of Manitoba,Manitoba,Canada,200810,135000.0,Fellowship - PA: Biomedical / Clinical HIV/AIDS Research,Fellowship Programs,Clinical,Infection and Immunity,Facs; Hiv; Immunity; Immunogenetics; Microarray; T Cells,"In 2007, there were 33.2 million people living with HIV/AIDS, and the number of women infected with HIV was estimated at 15.4 million. In Canada, the rate of infection is increasing and particularly in women and Aboriginal people. Preventive vaccine strategies are still under development, but until now clinical trials have failed to prove the efficiency and safety of commercially available compounds. A subset of HIV infected individuals known as Elite controllers show a particularly slow and benign course of disease progression. Understanding the factors associated with the absence of progression will help to develop an HIV vaccine. Because, many factors could be involved in the control of this disease, our study will focus on the analysis of the genetic and immune system of Canadian Aboriginal people. For the genetic part, we will analyse the genes associated with the antigen presentation (called HLA), the cell receptor for the HIV virus (CD4) and the proteins which binds this receptor (Rantes and SDF-1). We will also study the presence of polymorphisms and the expression of those genes. For the immune part, we will mainly focus on an important immune cell called T cells. T cells have major functions in the immune system and they play a role at different levels: they can kill the virus, produce substances that lead to the activation of other immune cells or repressed the activation of immune cells. The virus also targets T cells and it has been shown that during HIV infection, their counts decrease with the disease progression. In this study we will look at the activation markers present on T cells subsets. Based on what was observed in HIV resistant persons, we believe that the Elite controllers should have an expression pattern different from the other HIV infected persons. The study of these individuals will provide extremely important insight into the control and protection mechanisms to HIV and may yield important clues for vaccine development.",3 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=177230&lang=en
177231,Will increasing APOBEC3G activity in the host cure HIV or cause cancer?,Land  Allison M,"Land, Allison M",University of Minnesota (Minneapolis),Minnesota,United States of America,200810,150000.0,Fellowship - PA: Biomedical / Clinical HIV/AIDS Research,Fellowship Programs,Biomedical,Infection and Immunity,Apobec3g; Cancer; Dna Cytosine Deamination; Genomic Mutation; Hiv-1; Hypermutation; Mutagenesis; Nuclear Localization; Retrovirus Restriction; Vif,"The human APOBEC3G protein has the potential to stop the spread of the AIDS virus, HIV.  APOBEC3G's mechanism of lethality involves causing mutations of guanine to adenine in the proviral DNA, which is termed hypermutation.  This can occur so frequently that APOBEC3G literally kills the virus.  However, the full potential of APOBEC3G is rarely realized in patients because HIV fights back with its own protein called Vif, which binds APOBEC3G and triggers its degradation.  This Vif/APOBEC3G interaction would therefore be promising to alter in favour of the host for therapeutic potential.  There is however one very important potential downside to such an approach:  too much APOBEC3G activity may generate cancer-causing mutations.  I therefore hypothesize that there is a critical threshold of APOBEC3G activity that is managed normally by host cells, but activity above this critical level would allow APOBEC3G to enter the host nucleus and cause mutations that could promote cancer.  To test this hypothesis, I will express a range of APOBEC3G protein levels in cell lines and primary cells and monitor APOBEC3G cellular localization (nucleus vs. cytoplasm).  I will also assess the induction of genomic mutations by monitoring reporter gene expression in cell lines for identification of mutations that nullify expression and by identifying the immortalization of primary cells.  The proposed research will determine the possibility of saturating the cell's APOBEC3G threshold.  If it can be saturated, we expect that with increased APOBEC3G expression, the level of APOBEC3G in the nucleus will also increase, as will the level of genomic mutations.  Before novel treatment strategies for HIV are considered that alter APOBEC3G activity or levels, it is imperative to elucidate if increasing APOBEC3G expression will send the promutagenic protein to the nucleus and cause genomic mutations, to help ensure that we do not accidentally design drugs that give people cancer (but cure HIV).",3 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=177231&lang=en
177243,CIHR Training Program in Obesity / Healthy Body Weight Research,Richard  Denis,"Richard, Denis; Cianflone, Katherine M; Deshaies, Yves; Després, Jean-Pierre; Godin, Gaston; Marette, André; Pérusse, Louis; Picard, Frédéric; Poirier, Paul; Raine, Kim D; Spence, John C; Tremblay, Angelo",Universit&eacute; Laval,Qu&eacute;bec,Canada,200811,1950000.0,Training Grant,Operating Grants,Biomedical,"Nutrition, Metabolism and Diabetes",Abdominal Obesity; Adipose Tissue Metabolism; Aging; Behaviour; Diabetes; Energy Expenditure; Energy Metabolism; Environmental Aspects; Food Intake; Genetics; Heart; Hypertension; Inflammation; Insulin Resistance; Lipid Metabolism; Liver Metabolism; Lung; Metabolic Syndrome; Morbid Obesity; Obesity; Research; Training Program,"Despite the increasing prevalence of obesity and the detrimental impact of this condition on health and health costs, there is as yet no consensus on either a mechanism or a cure for adult and childhood obesity. It appears therefore urgent to intensify the research effort to better understand the complications, etiology and treatment/prevention of obesity in an integrative approach.

   To achieve this objective, there is an urgent need for scientists specifically devoted to obesity research. There is an evident lack of such researchers in Canada and it has become imperative that we develop programs to train highly qualified personnel in the field of obesity. In addition, the exponential increase in knowledge pertaining to the basic, clinical and social aspects of obesity calls for the development of tools devoted to helping health professionals have rapid access to cutting-edge information.

   The GLOBAL OBJECTIVE of this proposal is to consolidate, develop and implement distinctive and efficient training initiatives in order to expand the capacity of the Canadian health research community to confront the problem of obesity in Canada and throughout the world. We intend to provide the next generation of scientific leaders with the knowledge, skills, ethics and motivation required to tackle the major public health threat that constitutes excess body weight.",6 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=177243&lang=en
177245,CIHR - Quebec Respiratory Health Training Program,Maltais  Fran&ccedil;ois,"Maltais, François; Berthiaume, Yves; Martin, James G; Rousseau, Eric C; Schwartzman, Kevin",Universit&eacute; Laval,Qu&eacute;bec,Canada,200811,1950000.0,Training Grant,Operating Grants,Biomedical,Circulatory and Respiratory Health,Knowledge Transfer; Respiratory Biology; Respiratory Epidemiology And Health; Student Exchange Programs; Transdisciplinary Training And Research,"Respiratory diseases are the third most important source of 
health burden, after cardiovascular disease and cancers.  They 
reflect a complex interplay between genetic factors, biological 
exposures, inflammatory responses, psychosocial determinants, 
and health services.  Future research must combine focused 
questions and abilities with broader understanding of respiratory 
disease, in both biological and societal context.   Future 
researchers will require key crosscutting competencies to take 
projects from great ideas to successful completion.  They will 
need to develop research questions with diverse colleagues and 
""consumers.""  They will need to disseminate the resulting new 
knowledge effectively, so as to improve relevant health 
outcomes.   As a first step, in 2003 the CIHR funded a Quebec-
wide multidisciplinary research training program in respiratory 
disease.  We now aim to broaden the scope of our program, to 
secure its long-term viability, and to further increase the impact 
of Canadian respiratory research.",6 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=177245&lang=en
177246,CIHR Training Grant in Cancer Research and Technology Transfer (CaRTT),Koropatnick  James,"Koropatnick, James",Western University (Ontario),Ontario,Canada,200811,1950000.0,Training Grant,Operating Grants,Biomedical,Cancer Research,Basic; Biophysics; Cancer Research; Cell And Molecular Biology; Clinical; Community; Industry; Training,"Cancer research requires a combined effort by many different individuals and organizations.  Funds are gathered; therapies are proposed, based on new knowledge, to prevent and treat cancer; clinical trials are designed and conducted; and patients, their families, and the public are educated with respect to new cancer knowledge.  Synergies among key partners are essential to generate and translate knowledge to the clinic and the community, but are not well-developed in Canada.  Basic and clinical researchers must develop interactive links with each other, with the private sector, and with the public to achieve true transdisciplinary synergy.  The London Strategic Training Initiative in Cancer Research and Technology Transfer trains researchers to forge these linkages and use them productively to translate new knowledge from the laboratory to the clinic and the community.",6 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=177246&lang=en
177248,3-D facial reconstruction: positive identification of missing children of Canadian Aboriginal ancestry and fostering self-worth within Aboriginal youth.,Peckmann  Tanya,"Peckmann, Tanya",Saint Mary's University (Nova Scotia),Nova Scotia,Canada,200809,23915.0,Operating Grant: SickKids-CIHR-IHDCYH New Investigator Grants,Operating Grants,,,Aboriginal Peoples; Community Health; Education; Forensic Anthropology; Law And Justice; Mental Health; Victimology,"In forensic cases, when no identification is possible, facial reconstruction can aid in establishing an individual's identity.  Presently, no data exist for facial thickness in Canadian Aboriginal populations.  This project utilizes ultraound technology to measure facial soft tissue depths in living Canadian indigenous children.  This project recognizes the special challenges faced by the Aboriginal youth and focuses on the goal of achieving 'health' as envisioned in Canada's Child Health Charter.",2 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=177248&lang=en
177251,Effect of Omega-3 Fatty Acids on Th2 Immunity,Cameron  Lisa E,"Cameron, Lisa E",University of Alberta,Alberta,Canada,200809,59000.0,Operating Grant: SickKids-CIHR-IHDCYH New Investigator Grants,Operating Grants,,,,,2 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=177251&lang=en
177258,Innate immune defences in neonates born early in gestation,Lavoie  Pascal,"Lavoie, Pascal",University of British Columbia,British Columbia,Canada,200809,64920.0,Operating Grant: SickKids-CIHR-IHDCYH New Investigator Grants,Operating Grants,,,Early Identification And Targeted Interventions To Improve; Healthy Developmental Trajectories; Trajectories,,2 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=177258&lang=en
177277,CIHR Training Grant  in Health Research Using Synchrotron Techniques (CIHR - THRUST),Pickering  Ingrid J,"Pickering, Ingrid J; Chapman, Dean L; Delbaere, Louis T; George, Graham N; Nichol, Helen K; Thomlinson, William C",University of Saskatchewan,Saskatchewan,Canada,200811,1788500.0,Training Grant,Operating Grants,Biomedical,Cancer Research,Advanced Imaging; Cancer; Drug Design; Enzyme Structure-Function; Neurodegeneration; Synchrotron X-Rays,"The proposed Training in Health Research Using Synchrotron Techniques (THRUST) program is a cross-disciplinary training and mentoring program in the development and use of synchrotron techniques to address key questions in Canadian health research. The program is centred at the University of Saskatchewan and will provide health researchers with comprehensive training in the use and development of the novel techniques at the Canadian Light Source, Canada's first synchrotron. A world-class cadre of synchrotron health experts will collaborate with other health researchers locally, nationally and internationally to mentor the brightest and best young researchers. Together, mentors and trainees will develop techniques and address priorities in Canadian health such as cancer metastasis, neurodegenerative disease and rational drug design. The unique combination of facilities and mentors gives THRUST the potential to become an international standard in synchrotron health research training.",6 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=177277&lang=en
177278,Characterizing a new AE1 mutant causing HS and dRTA,Cordat  Emmanuelle,"Cordat, Emmanuelle",University of Alberta,Alberta,Canada,200809,64365.0,Operating Grant: SickKids-CIHR-IHDCYH New Investigator Grants,Operating Grants,,,Cell Biology; Membrane Protein; Nephrology,,2 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=177278&lang=en
177279,CIHR IMPACT Strategic Training Program,Walley  Keith R,"Walley, Keith R",University of British Columbia,British Columbia,Canada,200811,1950000.0,Training Grant,Operating Grants,Clinical,Circulatory and Respiratory Health,Cardiovascular; Cell And Molecular Biology; Clinical Research; Clinician-Scientist; Environment; Gene; Genotyping; Imaging; Mentoring; Phenotyping; Physiology; Pulmonary; Teaching; Training; Transdisciplinary Thematic Research,"IMPACT focuses on training PhD and MD post-doctoral research fellows with research targeted at the role of inflammation and repair processes in pulmonary and cardiovascular disease.  IMPACT aims to improve our ability to translate basic research findings into improved patient care and, accordingly, is transdisciplinary.  IMPACT focuses on post-doctoral trainees because it is at this level that we can most effectively introduce PhD trainees to key clinical research issues and MD trainees to key basic research techniques and thought processes - and initiate this collaborative approach early in their careers.  We accomplish this by bringing both categories of post-doctoral fellows together and ensuring that each post-doctoral fellow has both a basic and clinical IMPACT mentor.  We have developed a rich curriculum to support these post-doctoral trainees and help them to excel as career scientists, a curriculum that has also attracted grad students and many others in our institutions thus providing significant broad value added to research and clinical training environments.  The role of IMPACT mentors exceeds the usual post-doctoral supervisory role by contributing to the shared curriculum and by mentoring our trainees through to their initial faculty appointments.  Our focus on this career step recognizes and addresses the concerning rise in age of independent investigators first obtaining peer-reviewed grant support in North American institutions and particularly targets the need for effective translation of basic research into improved clinical outcomes.",6 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=177279&lang=en
177280,The molecular mechanisms for fetal programming in the liver,Hardy  Daniel B,"Hardy, Daniel B",Western University (Ontario),Ontario,Canada,200809,0.0,Operating Grant: SickKids-CIHR-IHDCYH New Investigator Grants,Operating Grants,,,Epigenetics And Transcription; Fetal Programming; Nuclear Receptors,,2 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=177280&lang=en
177282,SMARCAL1 modulated pathways,Boerkoel  Cornelius F,"Boerkoel, Cornelius F",University of British Columbia,British Columbia,Canada,200809,65000.0,Operating Grant: SickKids-CIHR-IHDCYH New Investigator Grants,Operating Grants,,,Modeling Quantitative Alterations In Transcription As A Caus; Of Childhood Disease,,2 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=177282&lang=en
177290,The functional profile of NK cells in HIV exposed uninfected subjects: Association with carriage of NK receptor-HLA ligand genotypes.,Bernard  Nicole F,"Bernard, Nicole F",Research Institute of the McGill University Health Centre,Qu&eacute;bec,Canada,200809,440604.0,Operating Grant - Priority Announcement: Canadian HIV Vaccine Initiative,Operating Grants,Biomedical,Infection and Immunity,Correlates Of Protection From Infection; Hiv/Aids; Hla; Immune Function; Nk Cells; Nk Receptors,"Natural killer (NK) cells are a key player in innate immunity to viruses such as HIV. NK cells can recognize virus infected cells very early after infection. They do so through cell surface receptors that recognize a cell surface molecule called HLA present on most cells in the body, including those that HIV enters in a new infection. The NK receptors and HLA molecules have many variants that differ from one person to another and influence the potency of NK cell activation when these cells see a virus infected target. Our previous work identified variants of NK receptors and HLA that are present more frequently in people who remain uninfected despite exposure to HIV (exposed uninfected or EU subjects) than in HIV susceptible individuals. There results led us to hypothesize that expressing the kind in NK receptor associated with protection from infection leads to activation of NK cells to either more readily kill HIV infected cells or prevent HIV from replicating and spreading. In this project we will study the anti-viral functions of NK cells from individuals carrying NK receptor HLA combinations associated with protection from HIV infection compared to that from subjects not carrying these combination. Understanding how EUs are protected from infection is important because it may provide clues on how to manipulate the immune system in the context of vaccines to reduce the risk of HIV infection.",3 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=177290&lang=en
177303,The Influence of Killer Cell Immunoglobulin-like Receptors and  Their Ligands on HIV-specific CD8+ T Cell Function,Grant  Michael D,"Grant, Michael D",Memorial University of Newfoundland,Newfoundland and Labrador,Canada,200809,273319.0,Operating Grant - PA: HIV/AIDS Research Initiative - Biomedical/Clinical Stream,Operating Grants,Biomedical,Infection and Immunity,Cd8; Hiv; Hla; Immunology; Kir; T Cell,"Several recent studies have found that expression of certain combinations from within groups of genes referred to as histocompatibility-linked antigen (HLA) genes or killer cell immunoglobulin-like receptor (KIR) genes is associated with protection from HIV infection or with slow disease progression.  Interactions between genes in these two families controls the function of natural killer cells and can also affect the function of T lymphocytes.  We are testing the idea that T lymphocytes attacking the human immunodefiency virus (HIV) work more effectively if they express members of the KIR gene family that interact with HLA genes that the HIV-infected cells also express.  If this idea were true, it would provide a mechanistic explanation for the genetic associations reported and introduce new strategies for vaccination against HIV.",3 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=177303&lang=en
177304,T Cell Immunity in HIV-1/HCV Co-infection,Ostrowski  Mario A,"Ostrowski, Mario A",University of Toronto,Ontario,Canada,200809,133511.0,Operating Grant - PA: HIV/AIDS Research Initiative - Biomedical/Clinical Stream,Operating Grants,Biomedical,Infection and Immunity,Cirrhosis; Cross-Reactive Immunity; Hepatitis C Virus (Hcv); Hiv; Inflammation; T Cells,"Approximately 25% of persons infected with human immunodeficiency virus 1 (HIV-1) are also infected with the hepatitis C virus (HCV) which is a major cause of cirrhosis (scarring) of the liver and liver cancer.  Persons co-infected with both HIV-1 and HCV have at least a 6 fold risk of progression to liver cirrhosis, when compared to HCV infected, but HIV-1 uninfected individuals. It is currently unknown why having infection with HIV-1 makes HCV much worse. About one in five persons with HCV/HIV-1 infection will only respond to the treatment for the HCV, which is a one year treatment. Thus, studies are urgently needed to understand this dual infection. The present study will use state of the art technologies in immunology in order to determine why HCV gets worse in the presence of HIV-1. One possibility is that the AIDS virus increases the amount of immune damage to the liver accidentally in dual infected persons. Another possibility is that the AIDS virus 'confuses' the immune system when it fights HCV. All of these possibilities will be answered in the current study. 
The results of this study will have important impact on understanding how HIV/HCV co-infection impacts liver disease and will influence how to treat persons co-infected with both HIV-1 and HCV. In addition the study will yield useful information for those involved with developing new immunologic treatments against HIV and HCV.",2 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=177304&lang=en
177305,Studies of the molecular mechanisms of AIDS-like disease in transgenic mice,Hanna  Zaher S,"Hanna, Zaher S",Institut de recherches cliniques de Montr&eacute;al,Qu&eacute;bec,Canada,200809,343555.0,Operating Grant - PA: HIV/AIDS Research Initiative - Biomedical/Clinical Stream,Operating Grants,Biomedical,Infection and Immunity,Aids; Animal Model Of Hiv-1 Infection; Molecular Biology; Nef; Transgenic Mice,"A major obstacle to the study AIDS pathogenesis and the development of effective treatments is the lack of a suitable small animal model. However, we have overcome this obstacle by generating transgenic (Tg) mice that express HIV-1 Nef protein in the same immune cells normally infected in humans. These mice developed an AIDS-like disease remarkably similar to the clinical and pathological features of human AIDS. These include premature death, weight loss, a gradual destruction of the immune system, characterized by thymic and lymphoid organ atrophy, altered thymic development of CD4+ T cells and organ diseases in lung, heart and kidney.  Functions of all immune cells in these Tg mice were shown to be impaired and this led to increased susceptibility to opportunistic infection. These Nef Tg mice have provided an excellent animal model to facilitate the molecular dissection of the underlying mechanisms of Nef involvement in HIV-1 pathogenesis. We believe that the Nef protein promotes the pathogenesis of the AIDS-like disease by modifying the functions of multiple distinct Nef expressing cell lineages, which collaborate together to induce pathology. In order to understand the complex nature of this disease, it is essential to dissect the role of each of these immune cells in disease development. Therefore, among the goals of this proposal is to identify the physiologically relevant targets of the Nef action and to understand how HIV-1 Nef protein could mediate the pathology in vivo. 
In conclusion, we have successfully modeled in mice, pathophysiology observed in HIV-1 infected patients. This work has significantly increased our understanding of HIV-1 Nef pathogenesis in vivo. Given the high degree of similarity between murine and human physiology, the knowledge gained from these studies will be directly applicable to understanding the human diseases that result from HIV infection and will open new avenues to combat the virus through novel anti-HIV Nef therapies.",3 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=177305&lang=en
177313,"Returning to activities after a mild traumatic brain injury in children and adolescents: the role of balance deficits, post-concussion symptoms and self-efficacy",Gagnon  Isabelle,"Gagnon, Isabelle",Montreal Children's Hospital,Qu&eacute;bec,Canada,200809,64200.0,Operating Grant: SickKids-CIHR-IHDCYH New Investigator Grants,Operating Grants,,,,,2 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=177313&lang=en
177316,"Diversity of chemokine receptor conformations: Significance for signalling, HIV infection and targeted therapeutic intervention",Heveker  Nikolaus,"Heveker, Nikolaus","Centre hospitalier universitaire Sainte-Justine (Montr&eacute;al, Qu&eacute;bec)",Qu&eacute;bec,Canada,200809,367557.0,Operating Grant - PA: HIV/AIDS Research Initiative - Biomedical/Clinical Stream,Operating Grants,Biomedical,Infection and Immunity,Bret; Chemokine; Conformation; G-Protein Coupled Receptor; Hiv Infection; Signal Transduction,"Receptors are molecules that transmit signals from the exterior of the cell to its interior. This process, called signal transduction, is elementary in the function of the immune, nervous and endocrine systems. Receptors are therefore much used targets for drugs blocking their functions. However, the same receptor has multiple functions, which are all blocked by drugs, leading to drug side effects.Our work describes different subpopulations of a single receptor, with different functional properties. Targeted inhibition of only those subpopulations involved in disease, while leaving others unaffected, would increase both efficacy and safety of drugs.For our project, the model receptors are chemokine receptors; they play prominent roles in diseases like HIV infection,cancer metastasis, atherosclerosis and inflammatory diseases. At present, only one drug targeting chemokine receptors is available, underlining the unmet need to better understand the mechanism of function of these receptors.",3 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=177316&lang=en
177321,The potential of APOBEC3G in the development of a novel anti-HIV-1 therapeutic.,Cen  Shan,"Cen, Shan",CIUSSS de Centre-Ouest-de-l'Ile-de-Montr&eacute;al-Jewish General,Qu&eacute;bec,Canada,200809,327993.0,Operating Grant - Priority Announcement: Canadian HIV Vaccine Initiative,Operating Grants,Biomedical,Infection and Immunity,Aids; Apobec; Deamination; Hiv-1; Integration; Ncp7,"APOBEC3G is a host factor that is able to inhibit HIV-1 replication. A HIV-1 protein, so-called Vif, can protect the virus from the attack of APOBEC3G by binding to APOBEC3G and subsequently destroying it. Understanding the mechanism of how Vif protects HIV-1 from the inhibtion by APOBEC3G may lead us to develop a novel therapeutic strategy for HIV-1 infection. The objective of this work is to explore the mechanism by which Vif abolishes anti-HIV activity of APOBEC3G.",3 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=177321&lang=en
177322,The study of familial infantile seizures in First Nations Children of British Columbia: A prospective observational study,Demos  Michelle,"Demos, Michelle",University of British Columbia,British Columbia,Canada,200809,65000.0,Operating Grant: SickKids-CIHR-IHDCYH New Investigator Grants,Operating Grants,,,,,2 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=177322&lang=en
177325,Studies on HIV integrase inhibitors as key components of effective therapy: Molecular and pathogenesis studies,Wainberg  Mark A,"Wainberg, Mark A",CIUSSS de Centre-Ouest-de-l'Ile-de-Montr&eacute;al-Jewish General,Qu&eacute;bec,Canada,200809,354153.0,Operating Grant - PA: HIV/AIDS Research Initiative - Biomedical/Clinical Stream,Operating Grants,Biomedical,Infection and Immunity,Aids; Antiviral Drug; Cell Culture; Human Immunodeficiency Virus Type 1; Immunoprecipitation; In Vitro Translation; Integrase; Mutagenesis; Northern Blot; Real Time Pcr; Reverse Transcriptase; Transfection; Virus Purification; Western Blot,"Highly Active Antiretroviral Therapy (HAART) has been successful in reducing HIV induced morbidity and mortality. A major problem is viral resistance to drugs included in therapy. To counteract this, and to best use current drugs, we must study the development of resistance. Drugs must be developed to attack novel viral targets. The most recently licensed class of drug are integrase inhibitors. These function by preventing HIV from integrating into the host genome, which is necessary for replication. Yet resistance to them has already been described.
The nature of viral resistance to integrase inhibitors has not been well characterized. Therefore our laboratory hopes to improve understanding of HIV integrase inhibitors by performing a series of experiments to provide a detailed picture of HIV resistance to integrase inhibitors. This will allow us to use integrase inhibitors in the national epidemic, but also to produce resistance data of enhanced international relevance.",3 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=177325&lang=en
177334,Maternal obesity causes fetal and neonatal mitochondrial dysfunction: Implications for childhood obesity,Raha  Sandeep,"Raha, Sandeep",McMaster University,Ontario,Canada,200809,65000.0,Operating Grant: SickKids-CIHR-IHDCYH New Investigator Grants,Operating Grants,,,Causes; Children And Youth; Fetal Growth; Preterm Babies; Prevention And Treatment Of Acute And Chronic Illness In,,2 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=177334&lang=en
177340,Preclinical characterization of multimeric ribozymes as potential preventive and therapeutic agents for HIV-1 infection,Joshi  Sadhna,"Joshi, Sadhna",University of Toronto,Ontario,Canada,200809,236234.0,Operating Grant - PA: HIV/AIDS Research Initiative - Biomedical/Clinical Stream,Operating Grants,Biomedical,Infection and Immunity,Aids; Gene Therapy; Hematopoietic Stem Cells; Hiv; Hiv-1 Infections; Multimeric Ribozymes,"To prevent HIV transmission in individuals at high risk of HIV infection, the mucosal epithelial cells of the vagina and rectum will be modified using a lentiviral vector to allow continuous local production of proteins that inactivate HIV and render the target cells non-permissive to HIV. CD4 serves as the primary receptor and CCR5 as the major co-receptor for entry by HIV. Therefore, a lentiviral vector will be designed to express a sCD4-FI3 (soluble CD4 fused to a fusion inhibitor) that will coat the virus and render it inactive, and scAbR5 (a single chain antibody to CCR5) that would bind to CCR5 and lead to its internalization as to render the target cells non-permissive to HIV. This vector will be used to transduce cervical epithelial cell lines. We will determine whether the interfering proteins secreted from these cells can inhibit HIV infection. If so, we will determine whether HIV transmission can be blocked in humanized mice that undergo gene therapy.  
To inhibit HIV-1 entry/replication in HIV infected individuals, CD4+ T cells, monocytes and CD34+ stem/progenitor cells will be modified using lentiviral vectors expressing multimeric hammerhead ribozymes. Ribozymes are small catalytic RNAs that can be designed to recognize and cleave a specific target RNA. Rz1-7 is targeted against 7 unique sites within the CCR5 mRNA, and Rz1-14 is targeted against 14 highly conserved sites within the HIV-1 RNA. These ribozymes can confer excellent inhibition of HIV-1 entry (Rz1-7) and replication (Rz1-14) in CD4+ T cell lines. We will determine whether CD4+ T cells and monocytes transduced with lentiviral vectors expressing Rz1-7 or Rz1-14 inhibit HIV-1 entry/replication, and exhibit normal cell functions. We will also test whether transduced CD34+ stem/progenitor cells can differentiate normally and whether the differentiated CD4+ T cells and monocytes express ribozymes, confer HIV-1 resistance, possess a survival advantage, and exhibit normal immune functions.",3 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=177340&lang=en
177342,Exploring interactions between HIV and the RNA interference pathway,Gatignol  Anne,"Gatignol, Anne",CIUSSS de Centre-Ouest-de-l'Ile-de-Montr&eacute;al-Jewish General,Qu&eacute;bec,Canada,200809,370670.0,Operating Grant - PA: HIV/AIDS Research Initiative - Biomedical/Clinical Stream,Operating Grants,Biomedical,Infection and Immunity,Ago2; Dicer; Hiv; Lymphocytes; Rna Interference; Trbp,"Viruses disturb numerous cellular functions upon their entry in the cell. The cell also reacts against the virus by different means. Therefore, there is a fight between the virus and the cell and the result of this fight will determine the outcome of the disease.  In the case of AIDS, most of the times, the virus wins and the disease develops. Therefore, it is important to study the factors that influence the cell response to be able to enhance it or to decrease what prevents its appropriate activity.  In human cells, one of these cellular responses is the interferon response and it is clearly not sufficient to clear the virus.  Another cell response has recently emerged during the last years and is called RNA interference because the cell can gather small RNAs and cellular proteins to act on the virus.  We will study the relationship between HIV and the components of this RNA interference pathway to find out how it influences the pathogenesis and the cell response and to find means to favor cell reactions against the virus.",3 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=177342&lang=en
177344,The Canadian triage and acuity scale for children; A prospective multi-center evaluation,Gravel  Jocelyn,"Gravel, Jocelyn","Centre hospitalier universitaire Sainte-Justine (Montr&eacute;al, Qu&eacute;bec)",Qu&eacute;bec,Canada,200809,63600.0,Operating Grant: SickKids-CIHR-IHDCYH New Investigator Grants,Operating Grants,,,,,2 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=177344&lang=en
177345,CIHR Training Grant in Medication Safety and Effectiveness,Dolovich  Lisa R,"Dolovich, Lisa R; Holbrook, Anne M; Levine, Mitchell A; Raina, Parminder S; Thabane, Lehana",McMaster University,Ontario,Canada,200811,1779904.0,Training Grant,Operating Grants,Health systems / services,Health Services and Policy Research,& Health Policy Research; Biosciences; Clinical; Clinical Pharmacology; Collaborative & Professional Skill Development; Drug Safety And Effectiveness; Interdisciplinary Training Program; Kt And Evaluative Research Methods; Medication Use In Older Adults; Population,"Medications, when used optimally, are a key management strategy in health promotion, disease prevention, and acute and chronic disease management, especially for older adults. However, little is known about the real world effectiveness of many therapies currently in widespread use. Part of this gap stems from the lack of research that engages the various disciplines involved in the drug development, prescribing, and use systems. Researchers skilled in health research design, molecular and clinical pharmacology, biostatistics, health services research, behavioural sciences and health technology assessment, are essential to the drug discovery, use and policy system in Canada and around the world.

The goal of this training program is to provide an innovative, multidisciplinary training environment for future scientists in Canada with a focus on integrating the generation and use of drug effectiveness, safety, and adverse event data into everyday clinical practice and policy. The program will focus on training individuals who will be leaders and practitioners in the research methods that are required to impact the use of medications for older adults in the real world. The main objectives of this training program are to: 1) create an innovative training program that links complementary disciplines at both trainee and mentor levels; 2) provide a rich learning environment that is content and research method focused; 3) increase the use of multidisciplinary and interdisciplinary approaches towards drug safety and effectiveness research; 4) provide tangible opportunities to develop collaborative research skills; 5) foster the development of professional skills through direct opportunities to learn and practice these skills; and 6) incorporate knowledge translation learning and activities at all stages of the training program.",6 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=177345&lang=en
177346,Genetic analysis of inherited cardiomyopathies in the Newfoundland founder population ... from gene discovery to functional analysis to clinical management,Haywood  Annika F,"Haywood, Annika F",Memorial University of Newfoundland,Newfoundland and Labrador,Canada,200810,36667.0,Regional Partnership Program Fellowship,Fellowship Programs,Biomedical,Genetics,Funcational Analysis; Gene Discovery; Inherited Cardiovascular Diease; Novel Gene; Novel Gene Analysis,"Nearly 150 families have been identified in Newfoundland with inherited cardiomyopathies many of which have an unknown genetic basis.  Of the genetically solved families a number had ARVD5, which was identified as a novel mutation in the under described gene, TMEM43.  Several other families were found to have mutations in Lamin A/C, dystrophin or plakophillin, genes known to be involved in cardiomyopathies.  Currently I am involved in the functional analysis of TMEM43 is underway through the generation of an animal model of the disease and using cell culture and in tissue sample from affected patients.  Analysis of other ARVC genes in the 15 families may yield modifiers of this disease.  Finally novel gene discoveries will be initiated looking at the remaining unsolved families that have already been recruited to this study.  This clinical cohort will be screened for relevant genes and unsolved, extended, multiplex families will be fodder for novel gene discovery, as was the case for ARVD5.     We hope that to make genetic testing possible and enable clinicians' insight to the disease to help them design suitable treatment options.",1 yr 7 mths,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=177346&lang=en
177348,Within-Day Patterns of Pain in Children with Juvenile Idiopathic Arthritis,Tupper  Susan M,"Tupper, Susan M",University of Saskatchewan,Saskatchewan,Canada,200810,55000.0,Regional Partnership Program Fellowship,Fellowship Programs,Clinical,"Human Development, Child and Youth Health",Childhood Pain; Chronic Pain; Cortisol; Cosinor Analysis; Epidemiology; Interleukin 6; Juvenile Idiopathic Arthritis; Multilevel Random Effects Models; Physical Activity; Time Series Analysis,"Approximately one in 1000 children suffer from Juvenile Idiopathic Arthritis (""Idiopathic"" meaning of unknown cause), a condition that can cause an unpredictable course of chronic pain and disability throughout the lifespan of the affected individual. Childhood pain can interfere with participation in school and social activities, cause anxiety and distress and therefore have a negative impact on normal childhood development. Pain from arthritis is rarely constant; it fluctuates during the day. Different types of adult arthritis have distinct symptom patterns. Adults with rheumatoid arthritis typically have more pain in the morning, while those with osteoarthritis usually have more pain in the evening. Patterns of pain are important to understand because they help clinicians and researchers understand possible sources of pain aggravation as well as point to potential treatments. In this study, we intend to look at: (a) how pain varies during the day for children with arthritis (b) whether or not pain patterns are associated with components of the disease, such as the amount of inflammation, by general characteristics of the child, such as age and sex, or psychological characteristics of the child, such as mood, or anxiety and (c) whether pain patterns are influenced by other factors such as physical activity. To our knowledge this will be the first study to look at how pain varies during the day in children with arthritis. This study will help clinicians, patients and their families have a better understanding of the pain experience which will lead to better pain management for children with arthritis. This research will provide a basis for other research to explore how treatment such as medications or physical activity affect the whole day pain experience and what mechanisms drive the changes in pain throughout the day.",2 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=177348&lang=en
177349,Dynamic chromatin structure controls Anaphase Promoting Complex activity,Islam  Azharul,"Islam, Azharul",University of Saskatchewan,Saskatchewan,Canada,200810,22500.0,Regional Partnership Program Fellowship,Fellowship Programs,Biomedical,Genetics,Apc; Chromatin; Chromatin Dynamics; Chromatin Immunoprecipitation; Gene Expression; Genetic Interactions; H3; H4; Hat; Hdac; Histone Modification; Northern Analysis; Rt-Pcr; Saccharomyces Cerevisiae; Transcription,"Chromatin is a nucleoprotein complex consisting of repeating units of 146 bp of DNA wrapped around a histone H3/H4 tetramer and 2 histone H2A/H2B dimers. Fully assembled chromatin is silent; histones must be post-translationally modified (PTMed) in order to activate gene transcription. Histone PTMs are catalyzed by histone acetyltransferases (HATs) and histone deacetylases (HDACs). These PTMs act as molecular switches for turning on or off  gene transcription. However, much remains to be learned regarding how HATs and HDACs are regulated. Misregulation of chromatin structure, due to altered histone PTMs, results in disease. Therefore, understanding how chromatin structure and histone PTMs are regulated is central to our battle against disease progression. Chemicals that inhibit HDACs (HDACi's) are capable of killing a variety of cancer cells and are now undergoing clinical trials. This clearly demonstrates the importance of histone PTMs to the health of the cell and organism. We have discovered that the Anaphase Promoting Complex (APC), an essential cell cycle regulator, is critical for histone acetylation, genomic stability and normal aging. To understand the role of the APC in histone acetylation, we conducted a genetic experiment using yeast cells showing that the APC required specific HAT and HDAC enzyme function to properly regulate cell cycle progression. The goal of this proposal is to investigate the specific mechanisms involved in how the APC interacts with, and regulates, chromatin structure. We will use the yeast system for these studies due to the ease of genetic and biochemical manipulations. The APC, HATs and HDACs are highly conserved from yeast to humans, making it likely that the knowledge gained from our yeast studies can be directly translated to the human system. These studies could lead to the future identification of relevant clinical therapeutic targets and provide insight into how disease progression in humans can be controlled.",1 yr 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=177349&lang=en
177351,"CIHR Training Program in Genetics, Child Development and Health",Gravel  Roy A,"Gravel, Roy A",University of Calgary,Alberta,Canada,200811,1950000.0,Training Grant,Operating Grants,Biomedical,"Human Development, Child and Youth Health",Congenital Anomalies; Developmental Biology; Genetics; Metabolism; Neurobiology; Reproduction,"Our understanding of human development - from embryo to adult -is being unravelled at a rapid pace. Specifically, the sequencing of the human genome and advances in modern genetics and experimental biology in model organism systems, are allowing for an understanding of how specific genes determine the formation of tissues in the body. At the same time, we are developing a greater understanding of how the interplay between genetics and the early environment control childhood development. However, for our healthcare system to take advantage, there is an urgent need to bridge the communication and knowledge gaps between biomedical scientists, clinical researchers and healthcare professionals no one of which can individually keep up with advancements outside of their own fields. The aims of the Training Program in Genetics Child Development and Health are to: i) further enhance the training activities and special events of our transdisciplinary educational environment; ii) improve the opportunities for team research across themes and with distant collaborators; and iii) emphasize the importance of knowledge translation and the ethical and social implications of genetics and child health research.",6 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=177351&lang=en
177353,Subvention de formation des IRSC-FRSQ en médecine génétique appliquée,Rouleau  Guy A,"Rouleau, Guy A","Centre hospitalier universitaire Sainte-Justine (Montr&eacute;al, Qu&eacute;bec)",Qu&eacute;bec,Canada,200811,1281761.0,Training Grant,Operating Grants,Social / Cultural / Environmental / Population Health,Genetics,Ateliers De Formation; Génétique Translationnelle; Partenariat Réseaux Frsq; Programme Multi-Institutionnel; Recherche Interdisciplinaire,"Dans le contexte des Initiatives stratégiques pour la formation en recherche dans le domaine de la santé, le Réseau de médecine génétique appliquée (RMGA) du Fonds de la recherche en santé du Québec (FRSQ) souhaite élargir le panel des activités offertes dans le cadre de son programme de formation. Le RMGA est un organisme sans but lucratif, fondé il y a plus de 20 ans. La transmission des connaissances est la base de la création du Réseau. Le RMGA propose un programme de formation en recherche de grande qualité, axé sur un enseignement dans des domaines d'études variés et transversaux en génétique translationnelle, en génétique en général et en génomique. L'objectif du RMGA est de développer les quatre événements phares de son programme : les ateliers de formation, les Journées génétiques, les bourses de formation et le programme de formation multi-et transdisciplinaire en co-supervision. Le RMGA souhaite étendre la portée et l'accès de son enseignement dans des domaines spécifiques reconnus comme essentiels par la communauté scientifique et la population en général. Le programme de formation est dirigé par les responsables d'infrastructures du Réseau qui ont en charge de développer un programme d'étude transversal à celui établi dans les 7 infrastructures de recherche du Réseau(les Plateformes de recherche appliquée, la Génétique du développement, les Interventions génétiques en Santé, l'Épidémiologie génétique neuropsychiatrique, l'Oncogénétique, la Génétique des populations et l'infrastructure socio-éthique et juridique). Les mentors de notre programme sont d'excellents chercheurs et professeurs, d'une renommée internationale parmi la communauté scientifique.",6 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=177353&lang=en
177357,CIHR-STIHR: Public Health and the Agricultural Rural Ecosystem (PHARE),Gordon  John R,"Gordon, John R; Dosman, James A; Duchaine, Caroline; Guernsey, Judith R; Kirychuk, Shelley; MacLeod, Martha L; Morgan, Debra G; Pickett, William; Potter, Andrew; Reeder, Bruce A; Senthilselvan, Ambikaipakan",University of Saskatchewan,Saskatchewan,Canada,200811,1950000.0,Training Grant,Operating Grants,Social / Cultural / Environmental / Population Health,Population and Public Health,Agricultural Health; Ecosystem Health; Public Health; Rural Health,"Few industries are so fundamental to society as is agriculture,such that our expanding global population increasingly pushes us to sustain ourselves.  This also drives the growing 
mechanization and use of chemical fertilizers, herbicides, and pesticides in agriculture.  While these have increased our productivity, they also take their toll on the health of farm 
operators and families globally.  In addition, rural-based industries such as mining, petroleum, forestry and others contribute significantly to the toll on the health and wellness of inhabitants of the global rural ecosystem.  These issues are complex, but must be addressed.  Evidence from all countries 
around the world clearly indicates that the health of those who live and work in the rural agricultural ecosystem suffers disproportionately relative to that of their urban counterparts, and not just modestly so.  Under the proposed program, we will bring together Canadian professionals from many disciplines to provide critical training to young scientists from across Canada as well as from abroad, in order to increase our research 
capacity and infrastructure, and thereby promote the health of rural-agricultural sector workers and families.",6 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=177357&lang=en
177380,CIHR StrategicTraining Grant in Public Health Policy,Cohen  Joanna E,"Cohen, Joanna E; Schwartz, Robert M",University of Toronto,Ontario,Canada,200811,1784790.0,Training Grant,Operating Grants,Social / Cultural / Environmental / Population Health,Population and Public Health,Interdisciplinary Training Program; Public Health Policy Analysis; Public Health Policy Determinants; Public Health Policy Evaluation; Qualitative And Quantitative Methodologies,"The SARS crisis, the tainted blood scandal, the massive public health burden due to tobacco products, controversy over the HPV vaccine, and many other recent events highlight both the importance of public health and the central role of public policy in maximizing the health of populations. Despite the importance of public health policy, no formal academic training in this field currently exists in Canada. The Strategic Training Program in Public Health Policy will address this gap, bringing together faculty from a broad range of disciplines and areas of expertise, to offer an outstanding training program in public health policy that is sustainable in the long term. Fellows will be trained in public health policy research, policy evaluation, policy analysis and policy change, and will be exposed to a variety of content areas including tobacco control policy, food security and nutrition policy, immunization policy and environmental health policy. They will also gain real-world experiences through work with public health policy professionals and participation in public health policy action teams, and will develop important professional skills, including a strong grounding in research ethics and public health ethics, through public health policy rounds, a summer institute, and a variety of opportunities for sharing their findings. Mentors are accomplished public health leaders:  they represent a range of academic units including the Dalla Lana School of Public Health, the Department of Health Policy, Management and Evaluation, the Department of Nutritional Sciences, the School of Public Policy and Governance, the Faculty of Law, the Joint Centre for Bioethics, and organizations such as the Public Health Agency of Canada and the Ontario Agency for Health Protection and Promotion. By addressing society's pressing and emerging public health priorities, the proposed training program will have a direct impact on improving the health of populations in Candada and abroad.",6 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=177380&lang=en
177384,The genetic vulnerability to substance abuse: behavioural and linkage analyses,Gill  Kathryn J,"Gill, Kathryn J",Research Institute of the McGill University Health Centre,Qu&eacute;bec,Canada,200809,100000.0,Operating Grant - PA: Prevention and Treatment of Illicit Drug Use,Operating Grants,Biomedical,Genetics,Alcohol; Cocaine; Drug Sensitivity; Genetic Mapping; Nicotine; Psychopharmacology; Qtl Mapping; Substance Dependence,"The use of tobacco is the largest single factor impacting upon chronic disease and premature death in Canada. Over the past decade research indicates that there are genetic factors passed from generation to generation that influence the development of alcoholism, smoking and drug abuse. The genetic risk is due to a number of genes working together, along with predisposing environmental factors such as stress, early life losses, or other mental disorder. Understanding the genes that influence the development of addiction is one of the major challenges facing mental health research at the present time. 

One method of finding the genes that may be involved in increasing risk for drug abuse is the study of animal models. In preliminary research, the applicant identified highly significant chromosomal regions containing genes regulating the stimulant effects of alcohol, cocaine and nicotine in mice. The objectives of the proposed research are to map and isolate genes that are involved in the regulation of the initial sensitivity to cocaine, nicotine and alcohol as well as oral consumption. The premise of the proposed research is that the identification of genetic factors related to drug and alcohol sensitivity and consumption will eventually lead to the design of new treatments and to the targeting of treatments for those individuals most likely to benefit.",1 yr 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=177384&lang=en
177389,Knowledge Translation Canada:  A CIHR Strategic Training Initiative in  Health Research,Straus  Sharon E,"Straus, Sharon E; Grimshaw, Jeremy M",Unity Health Toronto,Ontario,Canada,200811,1778626.0,Training Grant,Operating Grants,Health systems / services,Health Services and Policy Research,Education And Training; Evidence-Based Health Care; Knowledge Translation; Quality Of Care,"Much of the $100B/year worldwide investment in biomedical and health research is wasted because of challenges to knowledge translation (KT) that remain understudied.  KT is the science and practice of putting knowledge into action.  Health systems fail to optimally use evidence with resulting inefficiencies and reduced quantity and quality of life.  We have developed a multidisciplinary collaborative network involving colleagues from 8 universities to improve the health of Canadians and the effectiveness of health services by identifying and studying solutions to ensure that Canadians have tools and skills necessary for KT.  The objective of this STIHR is to create an internationally-recognised national training initiative to enhance capacity in KT and KT research by providing excellent training centres and laboratories for trainees from various disciplines to develop skills in KT and KT research; linking trainees and mentors who will work collaboratively to advance the science and practice of KT; and partnering with other national and international networks to promote KT research and training across a range of settings and health system issues.  Support for this program will place Canada in a leadership position by providing a unique training model through the nurturing of transdisciplinary collaborations and will result in the creation of the next generation of KT researchers and practitioners, and in improved health of Canadians.",6 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=177389&lang=en
177395,CIHR - Quebec Training Network in Perinatal Research,Fraser  William D,"Fraser, William D; Bujold, Emmanuel; Chaillet, Nils; Gagnon, Robert; Hatem, Marie; Monnier, Patricia O; Muckle, Gina; Murphy, Bruce D; Tremblay, Yves; Williams-Jones, Bryn","Centre hospitalier universitaire Sainte-Justine (Montr&eacute;al, Qu&eacute;bec)",Qu&eacute;bec,Canada,200811,975000.0,Training Grant,Operating Grants,Clinical,"Human Development, Child and Youth Health",Environment-Health Interactions; Epidemiology; Knowledge Translation; Network; Perinatal; Training,"The exponential expansion of knowledge in the basic and clinical sciences in perinatology requires that health professionals and researchers develop new expertise to integrate the biological, social, cultural and ethical issues of new reproductive technologies in their research. Moreover, researchers must develop leadership in knowledge transfer, ethics and gender-related issues in reproductive and perinatal health in order to play a more active role in developing and implementing policies that will impact favourably on the health of women and their families. The Quebec Training Network in Perinatal Research (QTNPR) will bring together five existing multidisciplinary research teams/networks, each with complementary expertise in specific areas to create a broadly accessible curriculum on the impact of environmental exposures to maternal and children health. Our objectives are to provide trainees the knowledge, skills and values that will allow them to address the complex interdisciplinary challenges of the current reproductive and perinatal health environment. QTNPR will train a new generation of researchers and improve Canadian population health care.",6 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=177395&lang=en
177400,CIHR Training Grant in Neurodegenerative Lipidomics:  A Targeted Systems Biology Approach to Integrative Research Training,Bennett  Steffany A,"Bennett, Steffany A; Figeys, Daniel",University of Ottawa,Ontario,Canada,200811,1790000.0,Training Grant,Operating Grants,Biomedical,"Neurosciences, Mental Health and Addiction",Alzheimer And Parkinson'S Disease; Cell Biology; Lipidomics; Mass Spectrometry; Neurodegenerative Disease; Systems Biology,"Alzheimer¿s Disease (AD) followed by Parkinson¿s Disease 
(PD)are Canada¿s most common and devastating 
neurodegenerative disorders. Insidious cognitive and physical 
decline renders victims dependent upon custodial care at an 
annual cost of $9 billion.  The lack of therapeutic options has 
been dubbed the ¿biggest unmet medical need in neurology¿ 
Arguably, the next major advance in rational therapeutic design 
will come in tying a cell¿s metabolome into genomic and 
proteomic maps of disease.  Here, we propose an unique trans-
institutional training program in ¿lipidomics¿ designed for basic 
and clinical scientists that focuses on characterizing global and 
cellular changes in lipid metabolism that render neurons 
vulnerable to AD and PD based at the University of Ottawa 
(Ottawa Institute of Systems Biology) 
and University of Toronto (Center for Research in 
Neurodegenerative Disease).",6 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=177400&lang=en
177401,"The Bridge Program: CIHR Strategic Training Program bridging public  health, engineering and policy research.",Brauer  Michael,"Brauer, Michael; Mcdaniels, Timothy L",University of British Columbia,British Columbia,Canada,200811,1941340.0,Training Grant,Operating Grants,Social / Cultural / Environmental / Population Health,Population and Public Health,Environmental Health; Health Policy; Knowledge Translation; Occupational Health; Public Health; Transdisciplinary Training,"Some of the largest gains in life expectancy in the last century 
were made by prevention measures using engineering solutions, 
reinforced by public policies. Examples include safe drinking 
water, sanitary sewage disposal, changes in heating fuels from 
coal to oil to natural gas, seatbelts in cars, and workplace safety 
systems. In spite of the importance of linking engineering, policy 
and public health, in typical university structures, engineering 
and medical faculties tend to operate very separately, and often 
do not interact with policy makers.

To bridge this divide, we propose to renew and build upon our 
successful Strategic Training Program, the Bridge Program, an 
innovative training model centred at the University of British 
Columbia with links to government, the private sector, and other 
research institutions. It aims to create a paradigm shift in the 
search for solutions to public health issues by bridging the 
realms of engineering, public policy, and the environmental, 
occupational, and public health sciences. The goal is to train the 
next generation of researchers, professionals, and policy makers 
so they will be able to work as partners to develop prevention 
strategies for the public health problems facing Canadians today 
and in the years to come.",6 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=177401&lang=en
177405,The CIHR ACHIEVE Research Partnership: Action for Health Equity Interventions,O'Campo  Patricia J,"O'Campo, Patricia J",Unity Health Toronto,Ontario,Canada,200811,1790000.0,Training Grant,Operating Grants,Social / Cultural / Environmental / Population Health,Population and Public Health,Health Disparities; Inner City Health; Interventions Research; Knowledge Translation And Exchange; Population Health,"The ACHIEVE Research Partnership will be Canada's first praxis-oriented, engaged research immersion program aimed to advance use of research evidence for effective and sustainable inner city health interventions. ACHIEVE will mentor highly-trained  health researchers to collaborate across scientific disciplines and with influential program and policy decision makers, in order to address inner city health problems and reduce health inequities. Across all health conditions, lower income families and individuals face highest rates of illness and experience greatest unmet need for health care. This is especially true in low-income urban neighbourhoods, where residents may face deep poverty, homelessness or unstable housing, social exclusion, family disruption, substance abuse and mental health disorders, barriers to service utilization, and social and economic isolation. During the last two decades, Canada has fallen behind many other nations in taking action to address health inequity. Relevant interventions research and strong cross-sectoral partnerships are needed to generate better evidence of ""what works and why"" in the Canadian context, and to move evidence into action. ACHIEVE will provide a training platform for new scientists to develop skills in complex interventions research and to work effectively in partnership with inner city health service providers, policy makers, and stakeholders. Over the course of this intensive, two-year program, Fellows will develop competencies that are unavailable through traditional graduate training yet necessary for closing the gap between monitoring urban health disparities and reducing them. ACHIEVE will be based at the Centre for Research on Inner City Health at St. Michael's Hospital. This dynamic setting offers unparalleled opportunities to generate evidence and alliances for urban health equity and to launch the careers of ACHIEVE Fellows.",6 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=177405&lang=en
177407,CIHR Training Grant in Autism Research,Fombonne  Eric,"Fombonne, Eric; Bryson, Susan E; Burack, Jacob A; Evans, Alan C; Iarocci, Grace; Mirenda, Pat; Mottron, Laurent; Roberts, Sheila (Wendy) G; Rouleau, Guy A; Scherer, Stephen W; Smith, Isabel M; Szatmari, Peter; Volden, Joanne; Zwaigenbaum, Lonnie",McGill University,Qu&eacute;bec,Canada,200811,1950000.0,Training Grant,Operating Grants,Clinical,"Human Development, Child and Youth Health",Autism Spectrum Disorders; Epidemiology; Genetics; Longitudinal Studies; Neuroimaging; Neuropsychology; Training Grant,"Autism is a serious and not so rare disorder that affects young children in the first 3 years of life (and 52,000 young Canadians under age 20). It is a lifelong handicap, with no cure yet available. Genetic susceptibility, abnormal patterns of brain growth, and specific neuropsychological deficits are well characterized.  Recent progresses in genetics, early detection and diagnosis, and early intensive behavioural interventions, are accumulating; however, families and professionals remain frustrated by lack of service availability. Well trained researchers in both basic and clinical disciplines are urgently needed in Canada.
Since 2003, we have successfully developed an Autism Research Training (ART) program that trained over 40 PhD and post-doctoral students conducting research in various disciplines (from molecular genetics to outcome intervention studies) at 9 Canadian universities. This renewal application will expand this innovative program, adding new faculty, new disciplines and research environments at 14 Canadian universities.
The training program involves a one-year stipend; 3 years of active mentoring (34 faculty, including 11 endowed Research Chairs) and 3 years of attendance at a summer school; travel stipends to facilitate recruitment and attendance at international conferences; regular trainee and program evaluation; a Winter Institute to increase faculty-fellow mentoring and organize with partners and stakeholders a joint national conference; a new initiative that will advance training outside Canada by funding international students to attend the ART Summer School. ART is administered from McGill which will separately fund its administrative support. Partners have committed at least  $675,000 of matching funds. The Program is designed to address the pressing needs of Canadians affected by autism as well as their families and service providers by optimizing the development of a new cohort of exceptionally well-trained researchers.",6 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=177407&lang=en
177417,National CIHR Research Training Program in Hepatitis C- Subvention nationale de formation des IRSC en hépatite C,Bilodeau  Marc,"Bilodeau, Marc",Centre hospitalier de l'Universit&eacute; de Montr&eacute;al (CHUM),Qu&eacute;bec,Canada,200811,0.0,Training Grant,Operating Grants,Clinical,Infection and Immunity,Education; Hiv Co-Infection; Knowledge Translation; Research Methodology; Transdisciplinary; Viral Hepatitis,"Hepatitis C infection remains a serious health problem both worldwide and in Canada. It is estimated that over 250 000 Canadians are chronically infected and over 6000 new cases occur each year.  The annual death rate in Canada from Hepatitis C is 4700. Moreover, at least 15% of HIV-infected individuals are co-infected with hepatitis C. The majority but by no means all new cases of Hepatitis C are observed in current and former injection drug users, Aboriginals and new immigrants. Over the last 5 years, the National Canadian Research Training Program has gathered 30 stellar Canadian mentors in clinical, social and basic sciences such as virology, addiction, HCV-HIV co-infection, nursing, molecular biology, immunology, etc. The program has recruited 23 students all of whom participate in a transdisciplinary curriculum. This proposal is targeted at renewing and further developing the program to increase student recruitment, strengthen its transdisciplinary component and enable collaborative research initiatives among the mentors and with colleagues internationally, the common goal being to eradicate hepatitis C and avoid complications in currently infected individuals.",6 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=177417&lang=en
177418,"The Alberta Nutrition Guidelines for Children and Youth: Evaluation of Awareness, Intent to Use and Early ¿Adoption of the Guidelines by Day Cares, Schools and Recreation Centres (R)",Mccargar  Linda J,"Mccargar, Linda J",University of Alberta,Alberta,Canada,200812,289576.0,Operating Grant: Population Health Intervention Research,Operating Grants,Social / Cultural / Environmental / Population Health,"Nutrition, Metabolism and Diabetes",Childcare Facilities; Evaluation; Healthy Eating Interventions; Nutrition; Nutrition Guidelines; Recreation Facilities; Schools; Surveys And Case Study Methodology,"In June 2008, The Alberta Nutrition Guidelines for Children and Youth were released by the Government of Alberta.  The goal of these guidelines is ""to equip facilities and organizations with the tools they need to provide children and youth with healthy food choices in childcare settings, schools, in recreation centres, at special events, and in the community at large"".  The government is disseminating this information as a resource for Albertans to promote healthy eating behaviours within healthy environments, a key step in chronic disease prevention.  Thus the purpose of this proposal is to evaluate awareness, intent-to-use and early adoption of the guidelines.  Optimal nutritional status is a complex health goal.  These population-based guidelines offer a consistent guide to provide nutritious food choices for youth in various settings.  It is important to evaluate awareness, intent-to-use and early adoption of the guidelines to gain a better understanding of how the guidelines can be used to promote healthy nutrition environments within different organizations.",3 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=177418&lang=en
177477,Mechanism of loss of vasodilation response to insulin in type 2 diabetes,Lautt  W. Wayne,"Lautt, W. Wayne",University of Manitoba,Manitoba,Canada,200809,91029.0,CIHR/Regional Partnership Program/Operating Grants,Operating Grants,Biomedical,Circulatory and Respiratory Health,Diabetes; Vascular Dysfunction,"Hormones released in response to a meal result in rapid glucose uptake into skeletal muscle.  This response includes dilation of blood vessels in skeletal muscle that allows increased delivery of glucose to the muscle.  We have recently discovered that the selective uptake of glucose into skeletal muscle is dependent upon a hormone released from the liver in response to insulin.  Insulin administered to healthy rats results in vasodilation of the skeletal muscle only in situations where the hepatic hormone is released.  The vasodilation is actually caused by this hormone and not insulin.  In this study, rats will be made diabetic by providing them with free access to a high sugar drink.  The health of the blood vessels will be assessed at several stages during the development of the disease and the ability of insulin to cause vasodilation secondary to release of the hepatic hormone will be determined.  The ability of drugs that have been shown to restore the release of the hepatic hormone to also restore the vasodilator response to insulin will be assessed.  This work relates directly to the numerous vascular dysfunctions known to be associated with diabetes and result in hypertension, blindness, cardiac and kidney toxicity, and often result in limb amputations.",2 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=177477&lang=en
177480,Implementation and impact evaluation of an Aboriginal supplement to the Everybody gets to play Community Mobilization Tool Kit,L&eacute;vesque  Lucie,"Lévesque, Lucie; Jollimore, Sharon M","Queen's University (Kingston, Ontario)",Ontario,Canada,200812,300000.0,Operating Grant: Population Health Intervention Research,Operating Grants,Social / Cultural / Environmental / Population Health,Indigenous Peoples' Health,Aboriginal; Community-Based Participatory Research; Implementation Evaluation; Network Analysis; Physical Acivity; Recreation,"This proposal aims to evaluate the implementation of a newly developed Aboriginal supplement to the Everybody gets to play Community Mobilization Tool Kit, a resource developed by the Canadian Parks and Recreation Association to assist recreation practitioners in mobilizing community partners to enhance access to recreation opportunities for children and youth living in low-income families. The proposed evaluation has the potential to create evidence about the conditions and events that facilitate and/or constrain the uptake of this supplement in Aboriginal communities.  New knowledge yielded by this research will provide insight into promising practices for engaging Aboriginal communities in physical activity and recreation opportunities to enhance healthy lifestyles and chronic disease prevention.",3 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=177480&lang=en
177492,Successful Aging of Older Canadian Males: The Manitoba Follow-up Study.,Tate  Robert B,"Tate, Robert B",University of Manitoba,Manitoba,Canada,200809,172333.0,CIHR/Regional Partnership Program/Operating Grants,Operating Grants,Social / Cultural / Environmental / Population Health,Population and Public Health,Cohort Design; Longitudinal Study; Older Canadian Men; Successful Aging,"For the past sixty years, the Manitoba Follow-up Study (MFUS) has documented the health and illness of 3,983 originally healthy young men through regular contact and routine medical examinations. MFUS members, living all across Canada, have also contributed data on smoking, physical activity, leisure activity, functioning and successful aging through mail-in questionnaires. In July 2008, there remained 849 study members, two thirds between 85 and 90 years of age. Some study members are living with debilitating chronic disease, while others enjoy healthy, active and productive lives. Gerontologists continue to attempt to understand the natural aging process by considering factors leading to ""healthy"" and ""successful aging"". To uncover not just if, but how and why, an individual might age successfully despite illness and adversity, requires a more encompassing model. The MFUS infrastructure is in place to explore ""successful aging"" of the Canadian male as a life-long process. MFUS continues to provide an unparalleled opportunity in Canada to support ongoing research in the aging process from early adulthood to death.",2 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=177492&lang=en
177501,"Simultaneous Determination of Free Drug, Total Drug, and Binding Protein Concentrations in Human Plasma",Musteata  Florin M,"Musteata, Florin M",Memorial University of Newfoundland,Newfoundland and Labrador,Canada,200809,60000.0,CIHR/Regional Partnership Program/Operating Grants,Operating Grants,Biomedical,"Neurosciences, Mental Health and Addiction",Concentration Of Binding Proteins; Free Drug Concentration; Individualized Treatment; Microextraction Devices; Pharmacokinetics; Total Drug Concentration,"Medication is the most relied-upon treatment in health care today. Despite its importance, the current medication-use system suffers from problems related to lack of safety and quality. In order to understand therapeutic and toxic effects of drugs and to continue developing more selective and effective treatments, analysis of drugs in biological samples and pharmaceutical products is growing in importance. Easy determination of unbound and total concentrations of drugs in biological samples is very important for separating population pharmacokinetics from population pharmacodynamics. Altered plasma protein binding is expected in uremia, liver diseases, after surgery, or when displacing drugs are also administered. In these cases, the target total drug concentration should be adjusted to attain the same therapeutically important unbound concentration. The composition of plasma can be subject to considerable differences due to pathological and non-pathological influences. For example, plasma albumin can be decreased to about 50% of the normal level in hepatic diseases and the concentration of lipoprotein-bound triglycerides depends on dietary status. Accordingly, good therapeutic practice should incorporate methods for determination of both free and total drug concentrations, as well as the concentration of drug binding proteins.
Since as many as 70 to 80% of adverse drug reactions are dose related, our success in preventing these adverse reactions is contingent on our ability to conveniently measure drug levels in biological samples, which provides the scientific basis for dose selection.
This research will also expand our understanding about the action of medicinal drugs and will speed up the development of new active compounds. Furthermore, the proposed research will improve personal health by increasing the safety of medication for all age groups.",2 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=177501&lang=en
177504,Structure-Function Based Molecular Design of Inactivation Resistant Lung Surfactants,Booth  Valerie K,"Booth, Valerie K",Memorial University of Newfoundland,Newfoundland and Labrador,Canada,200809,225000.0,CIHR/Regional Partnership Program/Operating Grants,Operating Grants,Biomedical,Circulatory and Respiratory Health,Acute Respiratory Distress Syndrome (Ards); Atomic Force Microscopy; Computer Simulation; Lung Surfactant; Nmr; Rational Drug Design,"Lung surfactant is a material that lines the air-sacs in the lungs and is essential for breathing. Premature babies are often born before they have a chance to produce sufficient lung surfactant and they need to be given artificial surfactant in order to help them breathe.  People of any age who are seriously ill or injured also frequently have damage to their lung surfactant which impairs their ability to breathe.  One such condition, called Acute Respiratory Distress Syndrome (ARDS), affects 150,000 people per year in the US alone, and has a fatality rate of about 40%.  Unlike with the premature babies, giving artificial lung surfactant to ARDS patients does not increase their chances of survival.  The reason for this is likely that the hostile conditions present in the lungs of ARDS patients that deactivated their own lung surfactant, rapidly inhibits the artificial surfactant they are treated with.  Our work is aimed at understanding the essential features of the proteins in natural lung surfactant and using this knowledge to develop artificial lung surfactant treatments that are more resistant to deactivation.",3 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=177504&lang=en
177505,Role of Tubedown in endothelial permeability in healthy vision,Gendron  Robert L,"Gendron, Robert L; Paradis, Hélène",Memorial University of Newfoundland,Newfoundland and Labrador,Canada,200809,143960.0,CIHR/Regional Partnership Program/Operating Grants,Operating Grants,Biomedical,Aging,Acetyltransferase; Actin Cytoskeleton; Blindness; Endothelial Cell Function; Protein Complex; Tubedown,"Central vision loss is a devastating problem that greatly impacts upon childhood development, the quality of life and the 
maintenance of functional autonomy. Retinopathy of prematurity, proliferative diabetic retinopathy (PDR) and wet age- 
related macular degeneration (wet AMD) are leading causes of blindness in western populations. These diseases are 
classified as neovascular meaning they involve the overgrowth of blood vessels in the retinal tissues of the eye. New 
improved therapies are needed to prevent and treat these retinal diseases. We discovered Tubedown, a factor 
present in healthy retinal blood vessels but reduced during overgrowth of retinal blood vessels. Using laboratory mice, we 
have found that loss of Tubedown from retinal blood vessels is an important predisposing factor for the progression of 
experimental retinopathy which mimics several of the hallmarks of human retinopathy. We will use our existing mouse model 
to determine the impact of Tubedown loss on visual function (ability of the mice to see). We will study the biological 
mechanism by which Tubedown protein acts to stabilize retinal blood vessels to understand how best to manipulate 
Tubedown function for therapeutic purposes for treating neovascular retinopathies. Restoration of Tubedown to retinal blood 
vessels may provide a new and specific therapeutic approach for preventing and treating neovascular retinal diseases in 
humans.",3 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=177505&lang=en
177511,Regulation of transcription in Huntington's Disease,Denovan-Wright  Eileen M,"Denovan-Wright, Eileen M",Dalhousie University (Nova Scotia),Nova Scotia,Canada,200809,171543.0,CIHR/Regional Partnership Program/Operating Grants,Operating Grants,Biomedical,Genetics,Gene Expression; Gene Regulation; Huntington'S Disease; In Vitro Transcription; Neuronal Cell Culture; Protein-Protein Interactions,"The genetic cause of Huntington's disease was identified 15 years ago. All people who go on to develop the devastating and progressive physical, emotional and mental symptoms of Huntington's disease have one copy of the gene that encodes an important protein called huntingtin which is slightly different in sequence from the normal copy of the gene that every person expresses.  It is absolutely clear that the protein encoded by the abnormal huntingtin gene directly causes Huntington's disease.  It is not known how mutant huntingtin initiates the deleterious changes in brain cells that occur over decades. Scientists are actively testing compounds in test tubes, cells and mouse models of the disease to see how compounds that are now available might alter the disease symptoms.  My research is focused on understanding what mutant huntingtin does that directly causes changes in brain cells that lead to disease symptoms. We have studied how mutant huntingtin protein directly changes the way that specific genes are expressed early in the disease.  If we can understand how mutant huntingtin interfers with the regulation of gene expression, we may be able to identify new targets for drug development.  Potential future HD patients can be easily identified at a very young age before degeneration of the brain occurs.  As such, treatments that would delay the time that symptoms start or reduce the severity of the disease could be very effective for this group of patients and their families.",3 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=177511&lang=en
177515,Lipid signaling in the eye: Pharmacology of cannabinoid receptors and their ligands.,Kelly  Melanie E,"Kelly, Melanie E",Dalhousie University (Nova Scotia),Nova Scotia,Canada,200809,221826.0,CIHR/Regional Partnership Program/Operating Grants,Operating Grants,Biomedical,Aging,Cell Signaling; Endocannabinoid System; Intraocular Pressure; Ocular Pharmacology; Receptors; Vasculature,"Increased pressure in the eye is a key risk factor in glaucoma, an age-related blinding eye disease that results in death of neurons in the retina, the tissue at the back of the eye responsible for transmitting light signals to the brain.  In addition, abnormal blood flow in the eye may also contribute to glaucoma. Drugs that decrease eye pressure are important in the treatment of glaucoma and are able to slow down the loss of vision in this disease.  Our research is examining drugs called cannabinoids which include naturally occurring chemical constituents of the cannabis plant and their synthetic derivatives. Cannabinoids are able to reduce eye pressure and may have beneficial effects on blood flow in the eye. These chemicals mimic the actions of natural compounds found in the eye called endocannabinoids. We want to determine how cannabinoids and endocannabinoids work in the eye and whether they have potential as a treatment for glaucoma and eye disease.",3 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=177515&lang=en
177538,Molecular mechanism of the human copper-transporting ATPases,Dmitriev  Oleg Y,"Dmitriev, Oleg Y; Delbaere, Louis T",University of Saskatchewan,Saskatchewan,Canada,200809,132144.0,CIHR/Regional Partnership Program/Operating Grants,Operating Grants,Biomedical,"Nutrition, Metabolism and Diabetes",Atpase; Copper Transport; Menkes Disease; Nmr; Protein Stucture; Wilson Disease,"Copper is required for the activity of many enzymes involved in respiration, neuron function, formation of connective tissue, endocrine processes, and radical detoxification in the human body.  Wilson disease ATPase and Menkes disease ATPase regulate copper concentration in the cell and deliver copper to biosynthetic pathways.  These proteins are targets of many mutations that cause severe metabolic disorders. Importantly, Wilson and Menkes ATPases are involved in cancer resistance to platinum- based chemotherapeutic drugs. To understand the critical steps in the activity cycle of the copper ATPases, we will investigate the structure, molecular motions and interactions of the isolated domains, or functional modules, of the Wilson and Menkes proteins using multidimensional Nuclear Magnetic Resonance (NMR), a technique uniquely suited for studying protein structure and dynamics in solution. We will trace the sequence of molecular events involved in substrate binding by copper-transporting ATPases and analyze the structural basis of several frequent disease causing mutations.   This work is expected to improve the understanding of an important class of transport proteins and provide a new insight into the molecular basis of the disorders of copper metabolism.  Structures of the individual domains of Wilson and Menkes ATPase will facilitate design of the new inhibitors and modulators of these enzymes, which may help to overcome certain types of drug resistance in cancer.",2 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=177538&lang=en
177541,Structural and functional adaptation of supraoptic neurons to sustained hyperosmolality,Fisher  Thomas E,"Fisher, Thomas E",University of Saskatchewan,Saskatchewan,Canada,200809,87002.0,CIHR/Regional Partnership Program/Operating Grants,Operating Grants,Biomedical,"Neurosciences, Mental Health and Addiction",Ca+ Currents; Channel Translocation; Osmosensitivity; Patch Clamp; Supraoptic Nucleus; Vasopressin,"Proper cardiovascular function in mammals depends on keeping the concentration of salts in the blood at a constant level. A critical part of this regulation are neurons in the brain that sense changes in saltiness (or osmolality) and release a hormone (vasopressin or VP) that regulates the amount of water that is excreted from the kidney.   When the body experiences a sustained increase in osmolality, these cells (the MNCs) undergo remarkable changes in shape and size and in their functional components that enable them to increase their release of VP for the long term.  We have found similar changes occur in MNCs that have been removed from rat brains and are maintained in tissue culture dishes, and this will enable us to study the biochemical events that lead to these changes.  We therefore propose to study how the MNCs adapt to sustained increases in osmolality and how these changes affect the ability of the MNCs to release hormones. This will help us to understand how the body maintains the critical blood parameter of osmolality in response to a sustained challenge and how neurons can undergo reversible changes in structure and function.",2 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=177541&lang=en
177551,A combined early and late HIV-1 protein-specific exosome-targeted T cell vaccine capable of counteracting immune supression and stimulating CD8+ CTL responses in absence of CD4+ T cells. A future therapeutic HIV-1 vaccine.,Xiang  Jim,"Xiang, Jim",University of Saskatchewan,Saskatchewan,Canada,200809,124388.0,CIHR/Regional Partnership Program/Operating Grants,Operating Grants,Biomedical,Infection and Immunity,Exosome; Hiv-1; Pharmaceutical; T-Cell; Vaccine,"Acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS) in human immunodeficiency virus type-1 (HIV-1)-infected patients is a rapidly expanding global pandemic, which causes millions of individuals died each year. Highly active antiviral therapy (HAART) is currently the only means to halt progression of AIDS. Although HAART which suppresses viral replication has significantly improved prognosis, it is unable to eliminate the proviral latent reservoir leading to some residual viruses remaining in treated AIDS patients. CD4+ T cells are required for generation and maintenance of cytotoxic CD8+ T cells playing a critical role in control of HIV-1 proliferation. However, CD4+ T cell depletion usually occurs in AIDS patients due to the viral cytopathic effect derived from binding of trimeric gp120  to CD4 of T cells. Therefore, how to stimulate efficient CD8+ CTL responses in AIDS patients becomes one of the major challenges in AIDS patient therapy. Since early HIV-1 proteins such as tat can broadern and enhance CD8+ CTL responses against late HIV-1 proteins such as gp120 and gag, a combined early and late HIV-1 protein-specific EXO-targeted T (aTexo) cells may be used as a novel immunotherapeutic vaccine capable of overcoming CD4+ T cell deficiency, dendritic cell (DC) dysfunction and immune suppression, and  stimulating effective gp120-/gag-specific CD8+ CTL responses in AIDS patients with immune suppression and declined CD4+ T cells.",2 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=177551&lang=en
177558,Anishinabe narratives about health and environment:  A participatory approach for preserving elder knowledge and promoting positive experiences for youth,Richmond  Chantelle A,"Richmond, Chantelle A",Western University (Ontario),Ontario,Canada,200809,62381.0,Operating Grant - Priority Announcement: Knowledge Translation,Operating Grants,Social / Cultural / Environmental / Population Health,Indigenous Peoples' Health,First Nations Health; Health And Environment; Indigenous Knowledge Mobilization; Participatory Research Methods; Qualitative Methods; Youth And Elders,"Research with Canada's First Nation communities has identified special a relationship between the health of the physical environments and community well-being.  Attachment to the land is health-promoting, as demonstrated in the songs and ceremonies of First Nation peoples, and in the transmission of this cultural knowledge across the generations. As First Nation communities become increasingly dispossessed of their traditional lands, significant strain is put on the quality of health determinants that depend on relationships with the physical environment, thereby leading to an erosion of the cultural knowledge needed to sustain these health-promoting relationships. The consequences of environmental dispossession are of particular concern among the Anishinabe communities on Northern Lake Superior, who have endured decades of environmentally exploitative resource development in their traditional territories and express anxiety about the effects of this development on community health and maintenance of cultural identity, particularly among youth.  Situated within a knowledge translation framework, our proposed three-year project will draw from a participatory approach that will engage youth (n=8) from four Anishinabe communities on Northern Lake Superior (Red Rock First Nation, Pic River First Nation, Batchewana First Nation and Garden River First Nation) in ethnographic research that involves interviewing their community elders (n=40) about key health and environmental issues, including their perceptions about the roots and consequences of changes to health and environment over time, and solutions for protecting the environment and improving health.  The purpose of this project is to preserve elder knowledge about health and environment, and to provide a knowledge transfer mechanism whereby local youth are actively involved in doing research that will benefit their communities, while at the same time expanding their own knowledge base and skill set.",1 yr 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=177558&lang=en
177581,Exploring mentorship as a strategy to build capacity for knowledge translation research and practice,Gagliardi  Anna R,"Gagliardi, Anna R","Sunnybrook Research Institute (Toronto, Ontario)",Ontario,Canada,200809,83765.0,Operating Grant - Priority Announcement: Knowledge Translation,Operating Grants,Health systems / services,Health Services and Policy Research,Education; Interviews; Knowledge Translation; Mentorship; Research Capacity; Scoping Review,"Numerous studies have shown a need to improve the quality of health care world wide. One way to do this is to help physician and nurse researchers undertake knowledge translation (KT). KT refers to different methods for ensuring that other health professionals are aware of, and use research findings about beneficial new health care procedures and services in the routine care of patients. Since research shows that adults learn best from peers rather than the more typical lectures, mentoring could be used to help physician and nurse researchers develop KT skills. Mentoring is a method for training adults that is primarily used in large corporations to support learning among new employees. In a mentoring relationship, a more experienced mentor provides ongoing advice to the novice mentee. We propose that researchers with expertise in KT could mentor physician and nurse researchers about KT methods, a process that has not been previously tested. To understand whether and how mentorship can be used to develop KT skill among physician and nurse researchers, we will first review published corporate research to learn about the features of successful mentoring programs. We will then interview physician and nurse researchers at the University of Toronto to share this information with them, and ask for their views on how to develop a KT mentoring program. In future research studies we will use their advice to plan and implement a KT mentoring program, and evaluate its success through further interviews with those involved to assess whether and how learning about KT took place.",1 yr 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=177581&lang=en
177590,Decision Aid for Radioactive Iodine Remnant Ablation in Early-Stage Papillary Thyroid Cancer,Sawka  Annie M,"Sawka, Annie M",University Health Network (Toronto),Ontario,Canada,200809,87552.0,Operating Grant - Priority Announcement: Knowledge Translation,Operating Grants,Clinical,"Neurosciences, Mental Health and Addiction",Behavioural Research; Decision Aid; Knowledge Translation; Psychology; Therapeutic Radio-Isotopes; Thyroid Cancer,"Each year, about 3400 Canadians were diagnosed with thyroid cancer, most of whom are diagnosed with papillary cancer at a early stage.  After surgery to remove thyroid cancer, such patients are faced with the decision on whether to accept radioactive iodine treatment or close medical follow-up.  There is some uncertainty and controversy about the benefits of radioactive iodine treatment in early stage papillary thyroid cancer.  We propose to design a plain language computerized decision aid explaining the risks, benefits, and uncertainty related to radioactive iodine treatment after thyroid surgery.  We will tailor the amount of detail provided in the decision aid to the needs of the user, as recommended by thyroid cancer survivors in a recent focus group study.  We will test whether the decision aid improves knowledge about treatment options.  We will also explore how information processing style may impact how individuals learn about medical treatment options and decision making.",1 yr 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=177590&lang=en
177591,Evaluating the use of narratives for Knowledge Translation of the Canadian Collaboration for Immigrant and Refugee Health practice guidelines.,Tugwell  Peter S,"Tugwell, Peter S; Pottie, Kevin",University of Ottawa,Ontario,Canada,200809,92700.0,Operating Grant - Priority Announcement: Knowledge Translation,Operating Grants,Social / Cultural / Environmental / Population Health,Population and Public Health,Health Equity; Knowledge Translation; Narratives; Qualitative Methods; Quantitative Methods,"This project will compare different ways of presenting research based guidelines to family physicians and nurse practitioners. Moving new health research knowledge into health care is not easy, and often health professionals find the lengthy scientific reports unwieldy to navigate. Narratives (or stories) will be compared with the more commonly used structured summaries, to see if narratives are have a stronger impact on intention to make changes in their current practices. A range of research methods will be used to develop and test the narratives, and compare the impact of different communication formats on primary care physicians and nurse practitioners.",1 yr 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=177591&lang=en
177592,Extrapolation of Cochrane systematic reviews: Developing equity evidence aid,Tugwell  Peter S,"Tugwell, Peter S",University of Ottawa,Ontario,Canada,200809,71542.0,Operating Grant - Priority Announcement: Knowledge Translation,Operating Grants,Social / Cultural / Environmental / Population Health,Population and Public Health,Applicability; Developing Countries; Health Equity; Priority-Setting; Systematic Reviews,"This project aims to develop and test methods to decide whether evidence on effectiveness from general populations applies in disadvantaged populations (e.g. low income populations, immigrants and refugees).  These methods will be applied to five topics (heart, musculoskeletal, HIV/AIDS, malaria, tuberculosis) to develop a database called 'Equity Evidence Aid' of clinical and public health  interventions that are likely to do more good than harm in disadvantaged populations.  This database will be aimed towards the needs of health care practitioners.  This project will also develop a database of high-priority topics for these five disease areas which will be widely disseminated and publicized to clinical researchers.  Both databases will be publicly accessible through the website of the Cochrane Health Equity Field.",1 yr 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=177592&lang=en
177694,"CIHR Training Grant in Health Law, Ethics and Policy",Flood  Colleen M,"Flood, Colleen M; Caulfield, Timothy A; Kouri, Robert P; Lahey, G.R. W; Lemmens, Trudo",University of Toronto,Ontario,Canada,200811,1947000.0,Training Grant,Operating Grants,Health systems / services,Health Services and Policy Research,Bioethics; Comparative Health Systems; Health Law; Health Policy; Multidisciplinary Mentoring And Training; Research Ethics,"With breakthroughs in scientific discovery comes the need for advances in the legal and ethical frameworks necessary to ensure advances are implemented in the health care system without harm.  With a 2001 CIHR grant we built a Health Law and Policy Training network at Dalhousie University, the University of Alberta and the University of Toronto.  By combining expertise both across universities and across disciplines we provide sophisticated multi-disciplinary training in order to address challenges such as use of patient data for research purposes, the development of regulatory frameworks for new drugs, or the ethical use of stem cells.  Our 71 trainees are all employed as academics or decision makers (in government, in non-governmental organizations and international agencies) or are pursuing further study.  In addition to our success preparing urgently needed graduates, we have also provided an unprecedented forum for experts in Canadian health law and policy.  Well over 500 academics, decision-makers, and scholars in fields as diverse as sociology and physics have attended our annual conferences and seminars.  Our website, on which our faculty put their course curricula, has become a valuable tool for Canadian teachers of health law (particularly those who are not lawyers teaching law to, for example, to medical students) and to scholars internationally.  We seek CIHR funding to continue this Program and to expand it in the following ways: to support training in French and exchange with Quebec researchers; to expand internationally through a new exchange program; to add new disciplines to speak to emerging health challenges in, for example, aboriginal health, mental health, and nanotechnology; to weave and strengthen ethics training throughout the Program; and to provide a  mentorship matrix for our Master¿s students that enhances their multi-disciplinary research skills and their ability to translate their knowledge to achieve impact in the health care system.",6 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=177694&lang=en
177805,Statistical Procedures to Assess Longitudinal Change in Domains of Health-Related Quality of Life,Sajobi  Tolulope T,"Sajobi, Tolulope T",University of Saskatchewan,Saskatchewan,Canada,200811,150000.0,Doctoral: Vanier Canada Graduate Scholarships,Studentship Programs,Social / Cultural / Environmental / Population Health,Population and Public Health,Discriminant Analysis; Health-Related Quality Of Life; Longitudinal Data; Variable Importance,"Health-related quality of life (HRQoL) is an important measure of the well-being of a person or group and is increasingly recognized as a valid marker of service need and health outcomes. Given the increasing morbidity associated with chronic disease that is occurring globally, there is significant interest among clinicians and public health professionals to understand how HRQoL changes over the disease course, and investigate the ways in which disease and disability affect HRQoL. Unfortunately, the analysis and interpretation of HRQoL is not straightforward. HRQoL is a multidimensional construct that encompasses physical, social, functional, and mental health; not all of the domains are equally responsive to changes in the disease state or level of impairment. Moreover in longitudinal studies, problems of missing data, subject loss, and outliers can invalidate results obtained using conventional methods of analysis. This research will develop and investigate statistical procedures to analyze multidimensional, longitudinal HRQoL data. It will focus specifically on procedures that can be used to discriminate between individuals or groups with different disease characteristics or health outcomes over time on multiple HRQoL domains. These longitudinal discriminant analysis procedures will be studied using computer simulation techniques and real-life data from a population-based longitudinal cohort study of individuals with inflammatory bowel disease. The overall goal of the research is to find the most appropriate procedure(s) for analyzing HRQoL data, to benefit health researchers and applied statisticians. The knowledge gained from studies of HRQoL is important for planning treatments and interventions that will have a positive impact on an individual's or group's health.",3 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=177805&lang=en
177837,Adiponectin Signaling in Cancer,Pinthus  Jehonathan H,"Pinthus, Jehonathan H",McMaster University,Ontario,Canada,200809,100000.0,Operating Grant - PA: Cancer Research (bridge funding),Operating Grants,Biomedical,Cancer Research,Adiponectin; Cancer; Kidney (Renal) Cancer; Obesity; Prostate Cancer; Protein Interaction,"Obesity is emerging as an established risk factor for cancer.  In several cancers such as prostate and breast cancer, obese patients tend to have worse prognosis than normal weight patients.  The link between obesity and cancer is not well understood.  One possible explanation is the effects of hormones that are exclusively secreted from the fat tissue.  The blood levels of one of these hormones, adiponectin, are inversely related to body weight, and therefore are reduced in obese patients.  Previous work from our laboratory and others demonstrate that adiponectin acts as a tumour suppressor.  We will study the molecular response of prostate and kidney cancer cells, all of which are associated with obesity, to adiponectin in order to elucidate the mechanism for its tumour suppressive effect.  This research is expected to provide understanding for the influence of obesity on cancer risk and basis for the development novel drug therapy for cancer.",1 yr 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=177837&lang=en
177838,Adoption of Adjuvant Chemotherapy for Non-Small Cell Lung Cancer in Ontario: A Population-Based Outcomes Study,Booth  Christopher M,"Booth, Christopher M","Queen's University (Kingston, Ontario)",Ontario,Canada,200809,70319.0,Operating Grant - PA: Cancer Research (bridge funding),Operating Grants,Clinical,Cancer Research,Chemotherapy; Knowledge Translation; Lung Cancer; Outcomes Research; Population Cohort,"Recent clinical trials have shown that when chemotherapy is given after surgery for lung cancer it causes more side effects, but cures a higher proportion of patients. The purpose of this study is to find out if these forms of treatment are now being appropriately used and if patients in the general population are getting the full benefit of them today. Our research centre has a unique database which includes information about diagnosis, treatment, and outcome of all patients with lung cancer in Ontario. We will use this information to answer the following questions: 1) Are patients receiving chemotherapy after surgery? 2) Are patients in different regions of Ontario receiving different forms of therapy? and 3) Do patients appear to benefit from chemotherapy? We hope to provide information about whether doctors are following established guidelines for the management of this disease, and whether it appears as though chemotherapy is useful to such patients. The results of this study will be valuable in developing strategies for maximizing the societal benefits of advances in cancer treatment.",1 yr 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=177838&lang=en
177842,Characterization of APLF (C2orf13) in DNA double-strand break repair and in the maintenance of genome stability,Koch  Anne,"Koch, Anne",University Health Network (Toronto),Ontario,Canada,200809,100000.0,Operating Grant - PA: Cancer Research (bridge funding),Operating Grants,Biomedical,Cancer Research,Dna Repair,"The faithful maintenance of our genetic information, encoded within DNA, is of importance to living organisms. However, DNA is under constant attack from numerous external agents in the environment, such as radiation and chemicals, as well as from essential cellular processes that can generate DNA-damaging free radicals. Damaged DNA that is unrepaired or inaccurately repaired can lead to gross aberrations in DNA, with the resulting potential for the development of cancer or cell death. One of the most deleterious types of DNA damage is the DNA double-strand break (DSB). The major pathway in humans utilized to repair DSBs is nonhomologous end joining (NHEJ), and defects in this repair pathway contribute to the development of cancer and cause extreme sensitivity to DNA damaging agents, such as ionizing radiation. This proposal focuses on understanding the role of a DNA repair protein called APLF in the maintenance of genome stability. We have shown that APLF promotes NHEJ and we wish to further pursue its role in the context of regulating DNA repair and DNA damage signaling. It is our hope that by gaining better insight into these processes, we may realize novel approaches in the development of therapeutic cancer modulators, for example in the modulation of radiation therapy.",1 yr 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=177842&lang=en
177853,FXR: a promising target for prostate cancer treatment,Barbier  Olivier,"Barbier, Olivier",Universit&eacute; Laval,Qu&eacute;bec,Canada,200809,100000.0,Operating Grant - PA: Cancer Research (bridge funding),Operating Grants,Biomedical,Cancer Research,Apoptosis; Cell Cycle; Fxr; Prostate Cancer; Urso; Xenograft,"Prostate cancer is the most frequently diagnosed malignancy in Canadian males and the third leading cause of cancer-related death in men in most Western industrialized countries. Estimations assume that approximately 660,000 men worldwide will be diagnosed with this form of cancer and 250,000 men will die from it in 2010. 

We discovered that a series of natural or synthetic compounds, which modulate gene expression through activation of a protein named FXR, are efficient blockers of the growth of common prostate cancer cell lines.

In this application, we propose to determine the therapeutic interest of these molecules in vitro and in animals models.",1 yr 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=177853&lang=en
177867,Regulation of p53-dependent apoptosis by Akt/PKB in C. elegans,Derry  William B,"Derry, William B",Hospital for Sick Children (Toronto),Ontario,Canada,200809,100000.0,Operating Grant - PA: Cancer Research (bridge funding),Operating Grants,Biomedical,Cancer Research,Apoptosis; Biochemistry; Cancer; Cell Biology; Chemotherapy; Genetics,"Adult organisms must maintain a relatively constant number of cells by sustaining a critical balance between cell division and
cell death.  If this intricate balancing act is tipped to favour too much cell survival an organism can develop tumors.  Genes that regulate cell survival are well conserved from simple organisms to humans.  We use the nematode worm Caenorhabditis elegans as a model system to understand how these genes make life and death decisions in the context of a developing animal.  We discovered that the cell killing activity of tumor suppressor p53, the most frequently mutated gene in human cancer, is regulated in a unique way by the proto-oncogene Akt/PKB.  The Akt/PKB gene is often hyperactivated in human cancers and confers a survival advantage to cancer cells in part by inactivating the p53 pathway.  We propose to determine how Akt communicates with p53 to regulate cell death using the powerful genetic tools available in C. elegans.  These studies will provide fundamental insights that will guide us in the identification of conserved genes in human cells that may be targeted therapeutically for treating cancer.",1 yr 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=177867&lang=en
177869,Static and Dynamic 3D Computer Model of Pre-Invasive Neoplastic Epithelial Tissues,Macaulay  Calum E,"Macaulay, Calum E",University of British Columbia,British Columbia,Canada,200809,100000.0,Operating Grant - PA: Cancer Research (bridge funding),Operating Grants,Biomedical,Cancer Research,3d Computer Model; Cell Sociology; Oral Mucosa; Pre-Invasive Biology Neoplasia; Quantitative Tissue Phenotype; Tissue System Biology,"Understanding the phenotypic changes of preinvasie epithelial cancer development is key for the detection, prevention and treatement of cancer at his earliest stages.  Due to the advances in optical imaging, our ability to detect precancerous lesions has greatly increased in the last 15 years.  Our understanding of the epithelial preneoplastic process has improved as the amount of histopathological phenotypic and molecular data available has increased.  However, we are lacking a mathematical and analytical molecular model to integrate the spatial and temporal multi-scale changes and events driving a normal differentiated epithelium into a dysplastic lesion phenotype against measured data and eventually towards an undifferentiated and invasive cancer.  The goal of this application is to develop and test an initial in silaco model of this process.",1 yr 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=177869&lang=en
177891,Characterization of a novel multi-subunit complex required for mitotic spindle assembly in mammalian cells,Lawo  Steffen M,"Lawo, Steffen M",University of Toronto,Ontario,Canada,200811,150000.0,Doctoral: Vanier Canada Graduate Scholarships,Studentship Programs,Biomedical,Genetics,Aneuploidy; Cancer; Cell Culture; Cell Cycle; Centrosome; Chromosome Segregation; Microscopy; Mitosis; Mitotic Spindle; Rna-Interference,"When a cell divides it needs to ensure that its genetic material is evenly distributed between the two new daughter cells. Failure to do so can turn normal cells into cancerous ones and can result in the development of other devastating chromosome-related diseases such as Down¿s syndrome. Thus, cell division is a very tightly controlled process that relies on an intricate network between many different proteins. I am particularly interested in centrosomes, which play an important role in cell division by organizing the mitotic spindle, a cellular machine responsible for the accurate segregation of genetic material. A better knowledge of the molecular mechanisms underpinning centrosome function and their contribution to the faithful segregation of the genetic material will advance our understanding of the molecular basis of cancer and other diseases.
Recently, our laboratory has identified a novel protein complex required for centrosome function. My work focuses on the systematic characterization of the individual complex subunits and tries to uncover how they act together to bring about the accurate segregation of chromosomes during cell division. To do so, our laboratory implements a combination of molecular biology, biochemistry and high-resolution microscopy to study dividing cells in real-time.
Of particular relevance to public health, the detailed characterization of these novel centrosomal proteins will provide much needed insights for the development of specific, efficient and tailored new therapeutic strategies. Drugs that inhibit cell division have already been successfully implemented into cancer therapy (e.g. Taxol). However, these treatments are often accompanied by severe side effects highlighting the importance of the further development of potent therapeutic strategies with lesser impact on the patient¿s quality of life. Given their prominent role during cell division, centrosomal proteins might provide promising new targets for drug development.",3 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=177891&lang=en
177892,Aquatic Body Weight Support as a novel approach for gait training after incomplete Spinal Cord Injury,Marinho Buzelli  Andresa R,"Marinho Buzelli, Andresa R",University of Toronto,Ontario,Canada,200811,150000.0,Doctoral: Vanier Canada Graduate Scholarships,Studentship Programs,Biomedical,Musculoskeletal Health and Arthritis,Aquatic Body Weight Support; Cardiovascular Conditioning; Innovative Device; Locomotion; Motor Control; Rehabilitation; Spasticity; Spinal Cord Injury,"It is estimated that there are approximately 40,000 individuals living with Spinal Cord Injury (SCI) across Canada, with more than 1,000 new cases each year. Almost half of all these individuals have some preservation of function below the level of injury which enables them to recover some of their walking ability. For this reason, several new approaches including body weight supported walking and technologies such as functional electrical stimulation have been developed to help persons with SCI gain mobility, reach functional independence and better quality of life. Therefore, the goal of the current project is to develop a new harness system to be used in the therapeutic pool to allow walking training in the water to improve their motor control, walking ability, cardiovascular conditioning, and also reduce pain and muscle stiffness. Reported benefits for pool therapy exist for persons with SCI. In the current project we will develop an innovative auxiliary device for walking training inside the water that provides an adequate postural adaptation that they can train in upright standing earlier post injury and capitalize on the benefit of being in the pool. We will determine the utility of this therapeutic approach by measuring the effect on optimizing walking ability. Patients will also be asked to rate the utility of the approach from their exposure to it.  We will determine the effect of this approach on the health status of persons with SCI and then on health related quality of life using a life satisfaction scale. We will determine if the approach that is being used elsewhere internationally has utility with persons with SCI as a new method for rehabilitation in Canada.",3 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=177892&lang=en
177893,Epigenetics of Major Depressive Disorder,Oh  Gabriel Hyun Ta,"Oh, Gabriel Hyun Ta",Centre for Addiction and Mental Health (Toronto),Ontario,Canada,200811,150000.0,Doctoral: Vanier Canada Graduate Scholarships,Studentship Programs,Biomedical,"Neurosciences, Mental Health and Addiction",Bisulfite; Diagnostic Markers; Epigenomics; Epimutations; Major Depressive Disorder; Microarray,"Major depressive disorder (MDD) is a medical condition defined by various symptoms, including overwhelming sadness, reoccurring thoughts of death, etc., persisting for more than 2 weeks. WHO¿s Burden of Disease Statistics (2002) ranked depression as the most burdening disease in Canada, measured by Disability Adjusted Life Years. The socioeconomic consequence of MDD is tremendous and therefore, much time and effort has been invested in an attempt to elucidate the aetiology of the disease.

It has been generally accepted that MDD is an outcome of both genetic and environmental influences. However, despite enormous efforts, no conclusive genetic or environmental marker has been identified thus far.  One of the difficulties faced by the traditional research approach is that MDD is a complex disease which exhibits heritability patterns that do not follow Mendel¿s laws. MDD exhibits discordance between monozygotic twins, sexual dimorphism, parent-of-origin effect, and fluctuating disease course - none of which are consistent with DNA sequence-based disease mechanisms.

Epigenetic refers to the regulation of gene expression that are not based on DNA sequence, but rather, controlled by heritable and reversible changes to the DNA (methylation of cytosines) and/or the chromatin structure (modifications of histones). The epigenetic model of major depressive disorder can explain the peculiar characteristics of complex diseases and provide a new interpretation of various non-Mendelian features of MDD. The goal of this study is to understand if and how epigenetic factors are relevant to the aetiological mechanisms of major depressive disorder. This study will be performed on a number of unique samples, which will enable us to interrogate most aspects of MDD using the epigenetic model. Epigenetic markers of MDD may provide new opportunities for the rational design of the next generation of depression drugs, as well as the development of a diagnostic marker for MDD.",3 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=177893&lang=en
177898,Molecularly targeted nanotechnology for enhanced radiation treatment of locally advanced breast cancer.,Chattopadhyay  Niladri,"Chattopadhyay, Niladri",University of Toronto,Ontario,Canada,200811,150000.0,Doctoral: Vanier Canada Graduate Scholarships,Studentship Programs,Biomedical,Cancer Research,Herceptin; Locally Advanced Breast Cancer; Nanotechnology; Targeted Therapy; X-Radiation,"My research will focus on locally advanced breast cancer (LABC), which has an unusually high and unacceptable mortality with only 1 in 2 patients surviving at 5 years. Locally advanced breast cancers (LABCs) are characterized by their large size, growth into the skin or chest muscle and under the arm. They carry a poor prognosis and it is difficult to prevent cancer recurrence in the breast which typically occurs in 14% to 39% of the cases. To prevent this, we propose to dramatically increase the effect of radiation therapy using gold nanoparticles bound to a drug that specifically targets BC cells.  The drug is trastuzumab (Herceptin), which is a drug currently used to treat patients that have aggressive BCs. It has long been known that X-radiation doses delivered to tumors can be greatly enhanced by their interaction with certain materials known as radiosensitizers (RSZ). Preferential delivery of these RSZ to tumors would then provide effective treatment while lowering the side effects associated with high dose radiation treatment. Gold nanoparticles due to their unique properties when exposed to X-rays are excellent candidates to be evaluated as RSZ. Further, gold nanoparticles are well tolerated in the body and are currently under investigation in human trials. We propose to connect trastuzumab to gold nanoparticles, which will deliver gold nanoparticles specifically to BC cells. Once the nanoparticles are loaded in the tumor cells, focused X-rays will be delivered and the gold nanoparticles will produce a spray of electrons inside the tumors. Our laboratory has previously demonstrated that these electrons, called Auger electrons, are highly damaging to the DNA of the BC cells thereby killing them, and two of our products based on this principle are currently in Phase I/II clinical trials. Initial calculations suggest that this novel approach using gold nanoparticles could enhance the cell killing effects by as much as 250 times compared to X-rays alone.",3 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=177898&lang=en
177905,Mechanisms of target selection and attentional control in the  frontal lobes of primates,Lennert  Therese,"Lennert, Therese",McGill University,Qu&eacute;bec,Canada,200811,150000.0,Doctoral: Vanier Canada Graduate Scholarships,Studentship Programs,Biomedical,"Neurosciences, Mental Health and Addiction",Attention; Attentional Deficit Disorder; Cognition; Electrophysiology; Frontal Lobe; Magnetoencephalography (Meg); Neuroscience; Non-Human Primates; Schizophrenia; Visual Perception,"Visual attention is a physiological mechanism that allows the filtering and modulation of behaviorally relevant signals from irrelevant ones. In the last decades, studies using electrophysiological techniques in the cortex of behaving animals and humans revealed that attention amplifies sensory signals that are relevant to behavior while suppressing irrelevant ones. How the brain allocates attention to behaviorally relevant sensory signals remains unclear. Some studies have suggested that the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex (dlPFC) of primates plays an important role in the selection of visual targets among distractors. Furthermore, this brain region seems to be dysfunctional in patients with attention deficit disorder (ADD). However, the role of this area on attentional control has not been yet clarified. My research aims at testing two main hypotheses; first, the dlPFC of primates contains neurons that encode the behavioral relevance of visual stimuli; and second, such neurons produce signals that reach sensory areas of the brain producing enhancement of behaviorally relevant stimuli and suppression of irrelevant ones. I have recorded neural activity from the dlPFC of humans and non-human primates during a task that requires selecting a target among distractors and sustaining attention on that target. I have already found in single cell recordings from one animal (116 recorded cells) that some neurons in the dlPFC mainly respond when the subjects select the target, while others respond and maintain their activity while attention is sustained on the target. These results suggest that the dlPFC contains neurons that encode both, the behavioral relevance of visual stimuli and the allocation of attention. In the near future, we will be testing whether these neurons send signals toward sensory brain areas producing attentional modulation of sensory information processing.",3 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=177905&lang=en
177920,Structural and functional study of integral membrane proteins,Priv&eacute;  Gilbert G,"Privé, Gilbert G",University Health Network (Toronto),Ontario,Canada,200809,100000.0,Operating Grant - PA: Institute of Genetics (Bridge Funding),Operating Grants,Biomedical,Genetics,Membrane Proteins; Protein Crystallization; Protein Structure; Transporters; Xray Crystallography,"Over half of all drugs available today act by interacting with membrane proteins, and there is intense interest in understanding these proteins at the molecular level in order to develop better pharmacological agents.  Unfortunately, this large class of proteins is only poorly understood at the biochemical and structural level because membrane proteins are notoriously difficult to study. We are using both novel and established methods to study two key membrane proteins. The first is a molecular pump that is able to transport a variety of compounds out of cells.  Similar pumps are involved in the multi-drug resistance phenotype, which is a clinically important problem in cancer chemotherapy.  The second is a bacterial membrane protein involved in human infection and inflammation, and our studies on this protein may lead to improved anti-bacterial agents.",1 yr 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=177920&lang=en
177923,Global Exploration of Cellular Networks and Pathways in Yeast,Andrews  Brenda J,"Andrews, Brenda J; Boone, Charles M",University of Toronto,Ontario,Canada,200809,50000.0,Operating Grant - PA: Institute of Genetics (Bridge Funding),Operating Grants,Biomedical,Genetics,Cell Biology; Functional Genomics; Genetic Interactions; Phenomics; Synthetic Genetic Array (Sga); Yeast Genetics,"Genome sequencing projects have revealed the massive catalogue of genes in a variety of organisms, from yeast to man. Biologists are faced with a major challenge as they confront this embarrassment of riches; how to assign functions to thousands of uncharacterized genes, and how to use this information to identify the proteins that function together to regulate fundamental cellular processes. Functional genomics technologies enable researchers to study all genes simultaneously and systematically in a specific assay and their development and application is providing unprecedented, global, views of gene function. We are developing novel genomics technologies and applying them in large-scale studies using a yeast model system. Yeast are single celled microorganisms that are related to humans evolutionarily, with thousands of genes homologous to those in humans. Our systematic approaches will accelerate the pace of yeast research and provide proof-of-principle analyses for analogous approaches in more complex cells and organisms.",0 yr 6 mths,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=177923&lang=en
177925,Genetic control of vascular endothelial cell specification and migration,Childs  Sarah J,"Childs, Sarah J",University of Calgary,Alberta,Canada,200809,100000.0,Operating Grant - PA: Institute of Genetics (Bridge Funding),Operating Grants,Biomedical,Genetics,Angiogenesis; Artery; Development; Guidance; Plexin; Semaphorin,"The growth, or lack of growth of blood vessels can affect the course of human disease. For instance, lack of blood vessel growth can lead to ischemia (lack of blood flow to a tissue), while overgrowth of blood vessels can lead to blindness, or to a robust blood supply to a tumor, allowing it to grow. We are interested in determining the genes that allow blood vessels to grow, and those that promote its differentiation into cells that don't continue to proliferate and migrate. Using a genetic approach in the zebrafish, we have identified two genes that affect whether vessels become arteries or veins, and that allow endothelial cells to migrate. In this proposal, we will elucidate how these genes function and interact with each other.",1 yr 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=177925&lang=en
177926,Regulation of MEF2 activity in cardiac and skeletal muscle,McDermott  John C,"McDermott, John C","York University (Toronto, Ontario)",Ontario,Canada,200809,100000.0,Operating Grant - PA: Institute of Genetics (Bridge Funding),Operating Grants,Biomedical,Musculoskeletal Health and Arthritis,Cardiac Hypertrophy; Cardiac Muscle; Gene Expression; Mef2; Proteomics; Transcription,"Specific patterns of gene expression underlie development of the heart and skeletal muscle. In addition, disease can lead to inappropiate  alterations in gene expression that can lead to negative changes in these tissues that compromise function, such as the ability of the heart to pump blood efficiently to peripheral tissues. The proposed work is designed to understand the fundamentals of how gene expression is controlled during muscle development and how this knowledge might be harnessed to limit disease related changes in the adult.",1 yr 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=177926&lang=en
177927,Tracking the yeast telomerase RNA,Wellinger  Raymund J,"Wellinger, Raymund J",Universit&eacute; de Sherbrooke,Qu&eacute;bec,Canada,200809,100000.0,Operating Grant - PA: Institute of Genetics (Bridge Funding),Operating Grants,Biomedical,Aging,Aging; Biochemistry; Cancer; Genome Stability; Molecular Genetics; Yeast,"Telomerase is an essential enzyme that ensures genome stability by replenishing the special DNA sequence repeats at the ends of eukaryotic chromosomes, the telomeres. Two components are required for telomerase activity in vitro: a protein that is believed to work like a reverse transcriptase and an RNA component, which harbours a sequence that will be used as a template for sequence copying. Inadequate expression, post-transcriptional processing and/or regulation of telomerase components are associated with a number of human disease states, foremost cancer but also dyskeratosis congenita (DKC). In fact, it has been shown that DKC can be caused by mutations in the RNA component of telomerase. Using yeast as a model system, we propose here to investigate the biology of the yeast telomerase RNA. In particular, we wish to determine all the components of the yeast telomerase, learn more about how the RNA is regulated and localized and how the enzyme operates at its most important location, namely the catalytic center. Given the fact that telomerase function and regulation generally is highly conserved across many species, including humans, we speculate that these studies provide critical clues and input into questions how this enzyme affects human health.",1 yr 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=177927&lang=en
177928,Characterization of the ERK/MAPK cascade function during mouse development,Charron  Jean,"Charron, Jean",Universit&eacute; Laval,Qu&eacute;bec,Canada,200809,100000.0,Operating Grant - PA: Institute of Genetics (Bridge Funding),Operating Grants,Biomedical,"Human Development, Child and Youth Health",Cellular Differentiation; Embryonic Development; Erk/Mapk Cascade; Molecular Genetics; Placenta Pathologies; Signal Transduction,"The development of a normal placenta is essential for fetal growth and survival, and defects in its development are associated with common problems affecting the course of human pregnancy. The abnormal differentiation of the trophoblast cells that are involved in the implantation of the embryo and in the establishment of the maternal blood flow is linked to preeclampsia and, if severe, may affect fetal growth (intrauterine growth restriction). By producing and analyzing Map2k1 and Map2k1 Map2k2 compound mouse mutants, we have established the essential and unique role played by MAP2K1 and MAP2K2 during placenta formation. Both MAP2K proteins are required for the normal response of the cell to specific signals during the formation of the placenta. However, they do not seem to be involved in the same processes. MAP2K1 is essential for the normal growth of the labyrinth region of the placenta whereas MAP2K2 seems to be required for the differentiation of the syncytiotrophoblasts in absence of one Map2k1 allele. Both types of mutation are characterized by the underdevelopment and hypovascularization of the labyrinth region leading to a non-functional placenta and the death of their progenies. The molecular mechanisms responsible for the specific functions of MAP2K1 and MAP2K2 are poorly understood. This application is aimed at elucidating the unique role(s) of Map2k1 and Map2k2 genes in signal transduction during embryonic and extra-embryonic development, as well as identifying the mechanisms involved in the specificity of signal transduction.",1 yr 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=177928&lang=en
177929,Genome-wide Association Study of Aortic Valve Stenosis,Brooks-Wilson  Angela R,"Brooks-Wilson, Angela R; McManus, Bruce M",University of British Columbia,British Columbia,Canada,200809,100000.0,Operating Grant - PA: Institute of Genetics (Bridge Funding),Operating Grants,Biomedical,Circulatory and Respiratory Health,Aortic Valve Stenosis; Cardiovascular Disease; Dna Pooling; Genetic Susceptibility; Genome-Wide Association Study; Single Nucleotide Polymorphism,"In a normally functioning heart, blood is pumped through the aortic valve (the ""gatekeeper"" of the heart) and out of the aorta to the rest of the body. Aortic valve stenosis (AS) is the third leading cause of adult heart disease and the most common form of acquired valvular disease in developed countries. Although some AS risk factors are known, the true interactions are complex and involve age, lifestyle factors, and genetics. Many different genes likely affect the development of these conditions. For each gene involved, there can be a variety of slight differences, or variants, known as single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs), in the DNA sequence of a gene. We are using an efficient and cost-effective multi-stage strategy to detect genetic variants associated with AS. We have genotyped over 1 million SNPs across the genome in AS patients (cases) and individuals without AS (controls) using separately pooled case and control DNA samples. Genotyping the individual case and control samples, as well as testing our results in a separate population will be necessary to verify the association of these SNPs with AS. Discovery of AS susceptibility genes holds the promise to provide critical insights into the mechanisms of AS, potentially leading to development of new molecular targets for therapeutics, as well as early detection of at-risk persons and new preventive measures for this serious valvular disease.",1 yr 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=177929&lang=en
177930,Molecular Mechanisms of Cytokinesis in Drosophila Spermatocytes,Brill  Julie A,"Brill, Julie A",Hospital for Sick Children (Toronto),Ontario,Canada,200809,100000.0,Operating Grant - PA: Institute of Genetics (Bridge Funding),Operating Grants,Biomedical,Genetics,Cytokinesis; Drosophila Molecular Genetics; Fluorescence  Microscopy; Membrane Traffficking; Phosphoinositides; Spermatogenesis,"Newspaper headlines highlight the devastating impact of infertility: ""Empty arms, aching hearts"", ""Common infertility treatments 'of little use'"". About one in seven couples is infertile, and approximately 40% of infertility cases are due to insufficient or defective sperm. One common problem found in infertile men is the presence of two-headed sperm, which are caused by failures in cell division during sperm development. Since sperm development is conserved from flies to man, we are using the fruit fly Drosophila melanogaster to understand how sperm cell division works. This allows us to take advantage of powerful genetic techniques, conserved genes and well-characterized stages of sperm development in the Drosophila model. Using this system, we discovered that sperm cells lacking a lipid molecule called PI4P fail cell division and form two-headed sperm. Our proposed experiments will use innovative microscopy and molecular genetic techniques to determine how PI4P promotes cell division. We expect that our results will ultimately translate into novel methods to control human fertility.",1 yr 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=177930&lang=en
177931,Molecular mechanisms of cell death induced by poly(ADP-ribosyl)ation,Poirier  Guy G,"Poirier, Guy G",Universit&eacute; Laval,Qu&eacute;bec,Canada,200809,100000.0,Operating Grant - PA: Institute of Genetics (Bridge Funding),Operating Grants,Biomedical,Cancer Research,Akt; Ampk; Apoptosis; Cancer; Cell Death; Chemotherapy; Dna Damage; Erk; Facs Analysis; Microscopy; Parp,"Human cells suffer DNA damage during normal cellular processes or as a consequence of exposure to DNA damaging agents such as ionizing radiation and UV. Cells have evolved mechanisms to detect DNA damage and repair lesions which could otherwise lead to cancer if left unrepaired. However, in the presence of large amounts of DNA damage, the cell may instead undergo a form of suicide, termed apoptosis, if it detects too much damage and cannot repair all of it properly. Treatment of cancer by chemotherapy and radiotherapy is actually taking advantage of the cell's ability to commit suicide. Chemotherapeutic agents and ionizing radiation both aim at damaging the DNA of cancer cells sufficiently to trigger their death. However, many cancer cells have altered their biology to circumvent cell death and therefore, the biochemistry of these cells is unique.

This project aims at understanding how cancer cells sense that there is too much damage to repair and how they trigger death signals. Specifically, we want to understand how PARP-1, a protein that rapidly detects DNA damage, and PAR, a molecule synthesized by PARP-1 at sites of DNA damage, send death signals within the cell, and which protein partners are involved in transmitting these signals. Identifying the molecules involved in death signals and understanding their functions is critical to design better cancer therapy treatments and to improve clinical outcome.",1 yr 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=177931&lang=en
177932,"Glucocorticoid repression, Cushing disease and pituitary tumorigenesis",Drouin  Jacques,"Drouin, Jacques",Institut de recherches cliniques de Montr&eacute;al,Qu&eacute;bec,Canada,200809,100000.0,Operating Grant - PA: Institute of Genetics (Bridge Funding),Operating Grants,Biomedical,Genetics,Cushing Disease; Glucocorticoids; Pituitary Tumours; Pomc; Repression; Transcription,"Cushing disease is caused by small pituitary tumors that lead to excessive production of adrenal glucocorticoids.  The excessive levels of these steroids lead to severe metabolic imbalance and may result in diabetes, hypertension and/or osteoporosis.  The hallmark of pituitary tumor cells that cause Cushing disease is that these cells are resistant to a hormone feedback mechanism that would normally restrict their growth.  By investigating the mechanism of this negative feedback, we have identified proteins and mechanisms that explain hormone resistance. This research project will determine the link between hormone resistance and tumor formation.  In addition, genes that are directly implicated in the process of tumorigenesis will be identified.  The elucidation of molecular mechanisms underlying tumor formation is the most rationale way to develop novel therapies for cancer management.",1 yr 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=177932&lang=en
177933,Interrogation of neuron-mediated morphogen signaling in the nervous system,Wallace  Valerie A,"Wallace, Valerie A",Ottawa Hospital Research Institute,Ontario,Canada,200809,100000.0,Operating Grant - PA: Institute of Genetics (Bridge Funding),Operating Grants,Biomedical,Genetics,Biochemistry; Cell Biology; Live Imaging Microscopy; Mouse Models; Primary Neuron Culture; Transfection,"The brain is the most complex organ in the human body, yet it originates from a very simple structure. We are interested in understanding the factors that guide the immature brain through a very complicated program of growth, neuron production and wiring that allows us to think, see and remember. To tackle this issue we are stuyding how neurons secrete factors to control development of discrete regions of the brain, in this instance the retina of the eye.  We will study how these factors are produced and released from neurons and how they affect cell behaviour.",1 yr 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=177933&lang=en
177936,Identification and characterization of genes responsible for inherited myoclonus dystonia,Bulman  Dennis E,"Bulman, Dennis E",Ottawa Hospital Research Institute,Ontario,Canada,200809,100000.0,Operating Grant - PA: Institute of Genetics (Bridge Funding),Operating Grants,Biomedical,Genetics,Disease Gene Identification; Linkage; Movement Disorders; Myoclonus Dystonia,"Our current understanding and treatment of most inherited disorders involving abnormal involuntary movements remains poor.  Myoclonus dystonia (MD) is inherited as an autosomal dominant (50% of offspring are at risk of developing the disease) form of myoclonus and dystonia and is characterized by rapid muscle contractions (myoclonus) and repetitive movements resulting in abnormal postures (dystonia).  Symptoms normally begin in the first or second decades of life and classically have no other associated features with the possible exception of subtle psychiatric symptoms (obsessive-compulsive disorder).  MD is a genetically heterogeneous disorder with only two loci responsible for the disorder.  The one known gene, e-sarcoglycan (SGCE) is on chromosome 7.  Approximately 40% of IMD patients demonstrate a mutation in SGCE.  The second locus, DYT15 was identified in our laboratory and is on chromosome 18.  The research project is divided into three parts.  Firstly, we are trying to determine the role played by SGCE in the brain.  This includes identifying those proteins which interact with SGCE.  Secondly, we are making a mouse model of myoclonus dystonia so that we can study the disorder and determine at a cellular level what is happening in the brain.  Thirdly, we are characterizing a gene on chromosome 18 which we think also causes myoclonus dystonia.  The results of this work will enable us to establish a genetic test for this disorder.  It will also teach us about how this movement disorder occurs.  We can then determine if pharmacological treatment will be possible.",1 yr 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=177936&lang=en
177942,Longitudinal study of chronic work stress effects on allostatic load,Juster  Robert P,"Juster, Robert P",McGill University,Qu&eacute;bec,Canada,200810,66000.0,Doctoral Research Award - Aging,Studentship Programs,Biomedical,"Neurosciences, Mental Health and Addiction",Allostatic Load; Awakening Cortisol Rise; Biomarkers; Biomedicine; Control/Demand Model; Cortisol; Neuropsychology; Psychometrics; Stress Reactivity; Work Stress,"Over thirty percent of Canadian workers experience chronic stress that puts them at greater risk of health problems. Given the staggering costs, both in terms of personal suffering and lost productivity, it is imperative that research focus on preventative strategies that detect individuals on the verge of stress-related impairments. Chronic stress alters normal biological functioning, or homeostasis, and consequently increases susceptibility to conditions like depression, burnout, and cardiovascular disease. The process of regaining stability in the face of these physiological changes is called allostasis, which can become overloaded when exposed to stressful environments over long periods of time. Measuring blood chemistry levels and their relations to psychological factors allows for earlier detection of potential health concerns. We hope to contribute to this promising work by extensively examining 125 chronically stressed workers over two years. Our aim is to develop tools to help identify at risk individuals that could then benefit most from preventative interventions addressing that address subtle biological abnormalities before they become clinical disabilities.",3 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=177942&lang=en
177948,Chromatin regulation of extrachromosomal gene expression,Schang  Luis M,"Schang, Luis M",University of Alberta,Alberta,Canada,200809,100000.0,Operating Grant - PA: Institute of Genetics (Bridge Funding),Operating Grants,Biomedical,Genetics,Chromatin Silencing; Fluorescent Recovery After Photobleaching (Frap); Herpes Simplex Virus; Innate Intracellular Antiviral Defenses; Regulation Of Gene Expression; Viral Disease,"We use viruses to study how nuclear structures regulate gene expression. These studies may also lead to novel antivirals.
We and many others have preliminary evidence that cells attempt to inactivate infecting virions by a process called silencing,
which involves so called epigenetic regulation. This process is also used to regulate cellular gene expression during
development and disease (such as cancer). In this application, we propose to further characterize this cellular response to
infection. As viruses are most tractable systems, we expect that our experiments will further advance our understanding of
the epigenetic mechanisms that regulate cell differentiation. Our research may also allow us to design in the near future
novel antiviral drugs to activate these cellular defenses. Antiviral drugs are commonly designed to target viral protein, which
assures that the targets of the drug are present only in infected cells, thus minimizing toxicity toward other cells, but leading
to drugs that select for resistant viral strains. Antiviral drugs that target cellular proteins, in contrast, do not select for viral
resistance as promptly because mutations on the viral genome (the cause of resistance) have no impact on the targets of
such drugs.",1 yr 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=177948&lang=en
177949,Regulation of cadherin function,Tepass  Ulrich,"Tepass, Ulrich",University of Toronto,Ontario,Canada,200809,100000.0,Operating Grant - PA: Institute of Genetics (Bridge Funding),Operating Grants,Biomedical,Genetics,Cadherin; Cancer; Catenin; Cell Adhesion,"The main damage done by most cancer cells results from invasion and metastasis. For this to occur, cancer cells have to leave the primary tumor and move to other tissues. Cells in our body do typically not leave their home tissue when healthy; in order for that to happen cancer cells have to change the properties of the glue that cells use to stick to their neighbors. Dr. Tepass studies the components of this molecular glue that mediates adhesion between cells. Understanding how this glue works will ultimately allow developing tools to manipulate the properties of this glue to prevent cancer cells from 'getting loose'. 
Cadherin is a molecule at the surface of cells and a key component of the molecular glue between cells. This cell adhesion molecule is an important regulator of animal and human development and makes critical contributions to cancer. We use the fruit fly Drosophila as a stand-in for humans to investigate how cadherin controls cell behaviour and which other cellular mechanisms modify cadherin function. During recent years the Tepass' laboratory has studied several aspects of cadherin function and regulation to clarify how cadherin contributes to normal development Dr. Tepass will continue his analysis of regulators of cadherin function. The central aim of this proposal is to develop a detailed molecular understanding of how the protein called alpha-catenin allows cadherin to associate with the cytoskeleton of a cell, a critical aspect of cell adhesion. 
About 85% of all forms of cancer derive from epithelial cells and are called carcinomas. The maintenance of epithelial tissue integrity, to which cadherin makes a major contribution, plays a pivotal role in the prevention of metastatic development in carcinomas. A better understanding of how cadherin and its associated molecules work normally is expected to inform us about cadherin functions in cancer, and will eventually help to develop better tools for cancer diagnosis and treatment.",1 yr 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=177949&lang=en
177950,Elucidating the Bacterial Cell Envelope 'Interactome' using E. coli as a Model,Emili  Andrew N,"Emili, Andrew N",University of Toronto,Ontario,Canada,200809,100000.0,Operating Grant - PA: Institute of Genetics (Bridge Funding),Operating Grants,Biomedical,Genetics,Affinity Purification; Bacteria; Genomics; Informatics; Mass Spectrometry; Membrane Protein Complex,"Bacterial cells are surrounded by membranes, which serve as barriers to the environment and can block access to antibiotics. Proteins embedded in membranes bridge this divide. Understanding the various roles of the many known and predicted bacterial membrane proteins and how these normally work together requires an understanding of how they interact with each other at the molecular level. In this grant renewal, we propose to adapt a set of advanced technologies (which we have previously used successfully to learn how the proteins present in the inside of a bacterial cell work) to study the physical interactions of each of the ~1,000 membrane proteins present in the bacterium E. coli. The resulting data will provide unprecedented insight into how microbes survive in various harsh environments and how resist the effects of antibiotics and the immune system.",1 yr 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=177950&lang=en
177960,Existe-t-il une relation entre les maladies métaboliques périphériques et la maladie d'Alzheimer chez la souris tritransgénique (3xTg-AD)?,Vandal  Milene,"Vandal, Milene",Centre Hospitalier Universitaire de Qu&eacute;bec,Qu&eacute;bec,Canada,200810,66000.0,Doctoral Research Award - Aging,Studentship Programs,Biomedical,Aging,Amyloïde-Bêta; Diète Riche En Gras; Elisa; Immunobuvardage; Immunohistochimie; Maladie D'Alzheimer; Maladies Métaboliques Périphériques; Résistance À L'Insuline; Souris Tritransgéniques Modélisant La Maladie D'Alzheimer; Tau; Vieillissement,"La maladie d'Alzheimer est la première cause de démence chez les personnes âgées. Des études récentes ont montrée que le risque de développer la maladie d'Alzheimer était plus élevé chez les personnes qui sont atteintes de diabète de type II et/ou de maladies cardiovasculaires. L'augmentation de l'incidence de ces maladies pourrait contribuer à hausser davantage l'incidence de la maladie d'Alzheimer, qui est déjà amenée à croître à cause du vieillissement de la population. Ce projet vise donc à étudier la relation entre les maladies métaboliques périphériques (diabète de type II et maladies cardiovasculaires) et la maladie d'Alzheimer.  Pour ce faire, nous évaluerons les paramètres sanguins caractéristiques aux maladies métaboliques périphériques (par exemple : le glucose, l'insuline et le cholestérol) chez des animaux qui modélisent la maladie d'Alzheimer. Nous déterminerons 1) s'il existe une association entre les marqueurs reliés aux maladies métaboliques périphériques et à la maladie d'Alzheimer, 2) si le fait d'aggraver les symptômes des maladies métaboliques périphériques aggrave ceux de la maladie d'Alzheimer et 3) si la correction des maladies métaboliques périphériques diminuent les symptômes associés à la maladie d'Alzheimer.  Ce projet de recherche révèlera comment les marqueurs sanguins des maladies métaboliques périphériques sont associés avec l'expression des symptômes reliés à la maladie d'Alzheimer chez la souris.  Ces connaissances sont importantes pour établir la possible association entre les maladies métaboliques périphériques et la maladie d'Alzheimer. D'un point de vue plus pratique, ces connaissances aideront à déterminer si les patients atteints de la maladie d'Alzheimer peuvent prendre avantage de l'arsenal pharmacothérapeutique disponible pour les maladies cardiovasculaires et le diabète de type II.",3 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=177960&lang=en
177964,Investigating the 'Quality Chasm': Seniors' Perspectives on Optimizing Chronic Disease Management in Their Communities,Cox  Lizebeth M,"Cox, Lizebeth M",Western University (Ontario),Ontario,Canada,200810,44000.0,Doctoral Research Award - Aging,Studentship Programs,Social / Cultural / Environmental / Population Health,Aging,Aging; Chronic Disease Management; Community Health; Diabetes; Heart Failure; Hypertension; Knowledge Translation; Mobility; Osteoporosis; Stroke,"With unprecedented population aging and chronic diseases so heavily impacting health system costs and quality of life, chronic disease management has become a priority in Canada and worldwide. Many disease-specific clinical practice guidelines (CPGs) currently exist that attempt to provide evidence-based standards of care for the major chronic conditions affecting Canadians. However, poor compliance and adherence to CPGs, by both patients and family physicians, is an emerging problem. 

The purpose of this population-based study is to investigate the current use of disease-specific CPGs and education programs by both seniors and family physicians and to produce criteria for evaluating the senior-friendliness of these guidelines and programs. 

This research study will consist of 3 phases. 
Phase 1 will examine the extent to which the use of disease-specific CPGs by family physicians and the chronic disease management practices of seniors converge by conducting a survey with family physicians and focus groups with seniors. 
Phase 2 will examine the obstacles encountered by seniors when visiting and discussing their chronic diseases with family physicians and the mobility issues seniors face in caring for their chronic conditions by conducting both a survey and mobility-specific interviews with seniors who have at least one chronic disease, in 5 seniors' communities in London. 
Phase 3 will use the knowledge gained in phases 1 and 2 to develop criteria to guide the development of senior-friendly guidelines and/or chronic disease education programs. 

Ultimately, the active engagement of seniors in learning about their chronic diseases, and in reviewing and providing feedback on available CPGs, will produce a set of criteria that will make disease-specific CPG recommendations more practical and senior-friendly and will begin to address the chronic disease management gap between recommended care and actual care.",2 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=177964&lang=en
177970,A Three Pronged Exploration of Etiology and New Treatment Options for Nocturnal Leg Cramps - Utilizing 1) RCT of Intravenous Magnesium Infusion 2) Cramp Subject Knowledge Synthesis and Collaborative Clinical Trial Design and 3) Sequence Symmetry Analysis of Quinine Prescriptions Using British Columbia Pharmacoepidemiologic Databases,Garrison  Scott R,"Garrison, Scott R",University of British Columbia,British Columbia,Canada,200810,66000.0,Doctoral Research Award - Aging,Studentship Programs,Clinical,Aging,Aging; Clinical Trials; Collaborative Research; Integrated Knowledge Translation; Magnesium; Nocturnal Leg Cramps / Rest Cramps; Pharmacoepidemiology; Randomised Controlled Trial; Sequence Symmetry Analysis; Study Design,"Waking at night with a painful leg cramp is increasingly common as we age. One third of adults over the age of 60 will have experienced such cramps over a 2 month period and 40% of those will have them 3 or more times per week. Knowledge about what causes them is lacking, and common treatment options are inadequate - having little effectiveness and, in the case of the drug Quinine, risk of toxicity.

Our project has three phases:

1) An exploration of magnesium deficiency as a potential cause of cramping, and magnesium infusions as a potential treatment.
 
2) A search of the BC healthcare databases to see if any existing prescription drugs appear to make cramping more or less likely.

3) A collaborative effort with cramp sufferers who are brought together in a large group. The group is invited to search for common experiences with respect to potential triggers and treatments and is provided relevant knowledge on muscle and nerve function. The group will discuss what is known about cramps to date and generate / discuss potential treatment ideas that will then be put to the test with a clinical trial. This approach optimally brings the knowledge, insights and values of cramp sufferers to the exploration of their own condition.",3 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=177970&lang=en
177988,Induced Pluripotent Stem Cells to model human Rett Syndrome,Ellis  James R,"Ellis, James R",Hospital for Sick Children (Toronto),Ontario,Canada,200809,100000.0,Operating Grant - PA: Institute of Genetics (Bridge Funding),Operating Grants,Biomedical,Genetics,Cell Reprogramming; Gene Therapy; Lentivirus Vectors; Neural Stem Cells; Neuronal Maturation; Pluripotent Stem Cells,"Induced Pluripotent Stem (iPS) cells are generated by inducing skin cells to change into stem cells that resemble embryonic stem (ES) cells. This ""reprogramming"" is performed by infecting adult skin cells with viruses that deliver a combination of ""pluripotency"" genes that confer stem cell properties. We have made mouse and human iPS cells using these pluripotency genes, and have developed a new EOS virus vector that signals when the skin cells are reprogrammed into stem cells. This technology can be immediately used to generate cell models of human disease by reprogramming patient skin cells into iPS cells, and then differentiating the iPS cells into the affected cell type. Rett Syndrome (RTT) is an Autism Spectrum Disorder (ASD) caused by defects in the MECP2 gene that affects girls with devastatingly early onset. RTT is an outstanding candidate for an iPS cell model of disease because it is not ethically possible to obtain nerve cells from the brains of these individuals. To create cell models for RTT, our first aim is to generate mouse and human iPS cells using skin cells from RTT knockout mice, RTT patients and normal controls. Our second aim is to differentiate these iPS cells into nerve cells for comparative studies to identify abnormal functions of RTT nerve cells in culture. Our third aim is to genetically rescue the RTT nerve cells by viral delivery of a normal MECP2 gene to rescue the nerve cell abnormalities. Overall, these exciting experiments will serve as a cell model to determine the functional defects in RTT nerve cells, and will test the ability of gene therapy to correct them in a patient specific context. The iPS cell lines may prove useful for screening potential therapies and for future cell therapies.",1 yr 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=177988&lang=en
177989,Variability in genomic sequences: Patterns of genetic events in the human population.,Labuda  Damian,"Labuda, Damian","Centre hospitalier universitaire Sainte-Justine (Montr&eacute;al, Qu&eacute;bec)",Qu&eacute;bec,Canada,200809,100000.0,Operating Grant - PA: Institute of Genetics (Bridge Funding),Operating Grants,Biomedical,Genetics,Genetic Diversity; Genetic Epidemiology; Human Origins And Evolution; Human Populations; Molecular Anthropology; Mutations And Recombinations,"Early 20th century mapping of genes in model organisms allowed us to understand the nature of heredity. During last decades we turned to genetic mapping and sequencing of our genome and studies of its variability across individuals and human populations. This is important for understanding the organization and function of our genetic program, and for gaining the fundamental knowledge about our species. In practice it leads to development of new diagnostic assays, to better understanding of hereditary disorders, and to new, more efficient therapeutic approaches. In our earlier studies, we have found that at least two, independently evolving African lineages contributed to the genetic diversity of modern humans. We also discovered a third lineage that is virtually absent in Africa, representing either another, lost African lineage or an Eurasian contribution. Our results are new and complement mitochondrial DNA and Y-chromosome diversity data. Indeed, they reveal new aspects of the human population history, differing thus from studies of only maternal and only paternal lineages represented by these systems. In the current research proposal we want to answer the question of how structured was the ancestral human population. And how many routes and how many founder effects accompanied colonisation of other continents. Our investigation focus on particular X-linked lineages but also includes the analyses of multiple loci and genome wide polymorphisms data. The resulting knowledge of the genetic structure of human populations and of the underlying demographic and genetic events is a necessary ingredient of the genetic epidemiological studies towards elucidation of the genetic basis of human diseases.",1 yr 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=177989&lang=en
178019,Function of Scyl1 in Membrane Trafficking and Neurological Disease,Hamlin  Jason N,"Hamlin, Jason N",Montreal Neurological Institute-Hospital,Qu&eacute;bec,Canada,200810,0.0,Doctoral Research Award - Priority Announcement: Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis,Studentship Programs,Biomedical,"Neurosciences, Mental Health and Addiction",Als; Biochemistry; Cerebellar Neuron; Confocal Microscopy; Endocytosis; Mdf Mouse; Motor Neuron; Scyl1,"The information encoded in the human genome is translated into proteins, which are the building blocks for cells and carry out all cellular activities. Once the proteins are made, they needed to be transported to the appropriate cellular location. We study the mechanisms by which cells transport proteins. Remarkably, as genetic studies reveal the genes that are altered in human diseases, many of the gene products are found to function in protein transport within cells. By studying these genes, and the proteins they encode, we provide the groundwork for more effective therapies in the future.",3 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=178019&lang=en
178022,Seat-human interface: Optimizing car seat properties to the individual for injury prevention.,Mang  Daniel,"Mang, Daniel",University of British Columbia,British Columbia,Canada,200810,33000.0,Doctoral Research Award - Relief of Pain and Disability,Studentship Programs,Biomedical,Musculoskeletal Health and Arthritis,Biomechanics; Biomedical Engineering; Car Seat Kinematics; Electromyography; Human Subjects; Injury Prevention; Neck Muscle Response; Neurophysiology; Startle Response; Whiplash Injuries,"Whiplash injury is the most common form of injury associated with low-speed rear-end collisions. In 2000, the direct and indirect costs associated with whiplash were estimated at over $500 million dollars in British Columbia. Currently, the exact physiological reason for these injuries is not known but most researchers agree that injury occurs in the joints and muscles of the neck. One possible factor associated with whiplash injuries is the mechanical properties of car seats, such as head restraint position and seat rigidity. Most car seats have been designed to reduce neck injuries using a crash test dummy representing an average male occupant.  However, most occupants are not the average male occupant and car seats are not optimized to prevent neck injury for each individual. The International Insurance Whiplash Prevention Group (IIWPG) uses four performance criteria to evaluate and rate the ability of head restraints and seats to prevent whiplash injury in rear end collisions. The objective of this project is to investigate how mechanical properties of car seats influence males and females of different mass and height according to the four IIWPG criteria during whiplash-like perturbations. We hypothesize that as seat rigidity increases, males and females of greater mass and height will exhibit greater head acceleration and neck muscle activity than with subjects of lower mass and height. Greater neck muscle activity and head accelerations will increase the likelihood of whiplash injuries. For the proposed project, 90 human volunteers will be subjected to a series of whiplash-like perturbations on four car seats with various seat rigidity levels.  Subjects will be separated into 6 groups (3 male/3 female groups) with specific mass and height ranges.  We intend to identify car seat factors that will best protect individuals with different height and mass during whiplash collisions.",3 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=178022&lang=en
178025,A population based examination of the influence of social networks on children risk of injury in vehicles using artificial intelligence computational models.,Rahaman  Shamual F,"Rahaman, Shamual F",University of Windsor (Ontario),Ontario,Canada,200810,33000.0,Doctoral Research Award - Relief of Pain and Disability,Studentship Programs,Social / Cultural / Environmental / Population Health,"Human Development, Child and Youth Health",Artificial Intelligence Agent Modelling; Child Safety In Vehicles; Injury Prevention For Children; Social Network Modeling,"Computer models have been successfully employed in several application domains (i.e.,economics, industrial engineering, archeology) to predict or simulate trends or phenomena using existing data. These applications have used specific approaches such as Multi-Agent Based Modeling (MABS), Complex Systems, Intelligent Systems, and Decision Support Systems. This research will use and Artificial Intelligence (AI)  algorithm to simulate the risk of injury for children traveling in vehicles in Canada using the existing national child seat survey (Transport Canada) to model and simulate and predict the influence of culture, social policy (Road Safety Vision 2010), social marketing, and educational interventions designed to support accurate and safe use of child seats for Canadian children. Significant progress has already been made, a model of family knowledge and use of child seats has been developed that identifies the significant influence of culture on use of child seats.  This model captures the socio-economic and cultural aspects of society relative to use of child seats and child risk of injury in vehicles. The proposed computer modeling methodologies will explore the dynamic interaction of how and when families use child seats and how their culture influences learning and decisions to use child seats, booster seats and seat belts. This model will simulate child risk of injury when policy, education, or cultural factors are introduced into the ""artificial"" society to predict outcomes such as child risk of injury.  Artificial intelligence models are based on real world data, but permit the examination of how child seat use changes when opportunities for awareness, learning, legislation, enforcement are introduced ""artificially"" into the model.  The goal of this research is to build innovative Artificial Intelligence tools to aid and support policy, social marketing, and injury awareness and education programs.",3 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=178025&lang=en
178027,Relationship of Mus81-Eme1 to Fanconi Anemia signaling in the DNA damage response,Mistry  Helena S,"Mistry, Helena S",University of Toronto,Ontario,Canada,200810,22000.0,Doctoral Research Award - Priority Announcement: Fanconi Anemia (SHOPP),Studentship Programs,Biomedical,Cancer Research,Cell Culture; Dna Cross-Linking Agent; Dna Damage Response; Fanconi Anemia; Knock-Out Mice; Tumorigenesis,"Environmental factors such as radiation or exposure to toxic chemicals can cause genetic mutations by damaging our DNA. Our cells have developed molecular circuitry that is turned ""on"" in response to damaged DNA, and is referred to as the DNA damage response. Defects in this circuitry have been identified in several cancer susceptibility syndromes, such as Fanconi Anemia. One pathway in this circuitry uses an enzyme known as Mus81-Eme1.  The enzyme has two components, Mus81 and Eme1, which work together as a pair of molecular scissors that helps to repair DNA by snipping at places where DNA is damaged. Mice and cells missing Mus81 have many similarities with how they respond to DNA damage compared to people afflicted with Fanconi anemia. Using mouse genetics, we want to determine if Mus81-Eme1 works together with proteins that are defective in Fanconi anemia patients to fix DNA.",2 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=178027&lang=en
178030,The Huntington's Disease protein has a role in the nuclear stress response:  Mechanism for a Huntington's Disease Biomarker,Munsie  Lise N,"Munsie, Lise N",McMaster University,Ontario,Canada,200810,0.0,Doctoral Research Award - Priority Announcement: Huntington Disease,Studentship Programs,Biomedical,Genetics,Alzheimer'S Disease; Biochemistry; Biomarker; Biophotonics; Cell Biology; Chemical Genetics; Drug Discovery; Huntington'S Disease; Live Cell Imaging; Tissue Culture Model,"Huntington's Disease (HD) is a genetic neurological disorder that affects families worldwide. HD is caused by a single gene encoding the huntingtin protein (htt) and an affected individual has a 50% chance of passing this gene onto any offspring.  HD manifests with physical, cognitive and emotional symptoms caused by degeneration of neurons in the brain leading to death within 10-20 years post-onset.  There is currently no treatment or cure for HD.  The causal factor of HD, mutant htt, has been studied for over a decade, however there has been no success in finding drugs to cure HD.  This is largely due to difficulties in studying the normal function of htt, making it impossible to ascertain what is going wrong in an affected individual.  Our labs focus is on studying the normal function of htt, in hopes of finding novel drug targets for this disease.  There are other similar neurological disorders, including Alzheimer's Disease (AD) and Parkinson's Disease.  These disease have different causal factors, however, all three diseases are related since their main pathology is degeneration of neurons in the brain; indicating that there may be similar things going wrong.  To this end, I have recently shown that htt interacts with the protein cofilin which is involved in rescuing a cell from stress.  The mis-regulation of cofilin has been shown to be involved in the neuronal degeneration seen in AD.  I have been able to show that this protein is also mis-regulated in HD and may be involved in neuronal degeneration in a similar manner to AD.  I have further observed that changes in the cofilin protein can be tracked in HD patient blood samples through disease onset making cofilin protein levels a biomarker for HD.  Current efforts are underway to deduce if changes in cofilin protein levels in the blood will be useful as a biomarker for AD.  Currently there are no biomarkers for neurological diseases, making this research a milestone in drug discovery for both HD and AD.",1 yr 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=178030&lang=en
178033,Commercialization and Controversy: The Case of Stem Cell Innovation,Axler  Renata E,"Axler, Renata E",University of Toronto,Ontario,Canada,200810,66000.0,"Doctoral Research Award - Ethics, Law and Society",Studentship Programs,Health systems / services,Genetics,Bioethics; Health Policy; Patents; Qualitative Research; Research Commercialization; Research Ethics; Research Regulation; Science And Technology Studies; Sociology Of Science; Stem Cell Research,"Stem cell research has been subject to considerable ethical scrutiny because of the use of embryos for scientific purposes. At the same time, stem cell researchers, funders and patient organizations confront elevated expectations of scientific and therapeutic promise. These researchers concerned with moving basic discoveries further downstream toward usable products, and those professionals who work to 'transfer' technology to market (i.e., technology transfer professionals) must manage commercialization imperatives in a climate of unprecedented levels of ethical oversight and regulation.

This research will use qualitative research methods, including interviews and fieldwork observation, to explore how these multiple pressures are experienced by those involved in stem cell research and commercialization.  Of particular interest are tensions that may be experienced in the use of human embryonic stem cells relative to stem cells drawn from non-embryonic sources.  Examining the beliefs, motivations and perceived roles and responsibilities of individuals directly involved in stem cell research and translation will shed light on how the controversial nature of the field in which they work affects their individual perceptions and decisions.  This research will produce an in-depth account of imperatives to commercialize research in the face of controversy, and aim towards the production of policy guidance in Canada and internationally (e.g., OECD, WHO) on improving the responsiveness of innovation efforts to health and health system concerns.",3 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=178033&lang=en
178049,Elucidating the molecular mechanisms of regulated and pathologic exocytosis in pancreatic acinar cells,Fernandez  Nestor A,"Fernandez, Nestor A",University of Toronto,Ontario,Canada,200810,33000.0,Doctoral Research Award - PA: Digestive Health (SHOPP),Studentship Programs,Biomedical,"Nutrition, Metabolism and Diabetes",Adenovirus Infection; Confocal Microscopy; Electron Microscopy; Exocytosis; Pancreatic Acinar Cell; Pancreatitis; Secretion Assays; Snare Proteins,"Pancreatitis is a major consequence of alcohol abuse where medical treatments are ineffective. Much progress has been made on the mechanism of alcoholic injury to other organs (liver, brain, heart) but not in alcoholic pancreatitis. We recently unraveled a novel mechanism underlying alcoholic pancreatitis, whereby supra-physiologic agonist (CCK or carbachol) stimulation, an established model of acute pancreatitis, redirected exocytosis normally occurring at the apical plasma membrane surface to the basolateral surface, which led to the earliest and mildest form of clinical pancreatitis - interstitial pancreatitis. We found the underlying mechanism of basolateral exocytosis involves a complex of exocytotic proteins: Munc18c/Syntaxin-4/VAMP8. Normal exocytosis at the apical region involves a different set of isoforms of these proteins. A fourth protein is required to complete each exocytotic complex mediating apical and basolateral exocytosis. Since SNAP23 is present in both regions of the cell, we hypothesized SNAP23 to be that fourth protein mediating both normal apical and pathologic basolateral exocytosis. 

To prove this hypothesis, we generated a pancreatic acinar-specific SNAP23 gene knockout mouse (by cre-lox recombination). We will use this mouse to conduct: 1) in vitro studies to demonstrate the precise exocytotic defects (using a combination of exocytosis imaging and secretion studies); 2) in vivo studies (whereby alcohol diet followed by agonist stimulation would induce alcoholic pancreatitis) to determine if SNAP23 is involved in basolateral exocytosis causing pancreatitis; and 3) gene rescue with a virus containing SNAP23 to see if it can reconstitute apical and/or basolateral exocytosis.

This work will reveal insight into the mechanisms promoting normal pancreatic secretion and predisposition to alcoholic pancreatitis, which could reveal potential drug target sites for pancreatitis and exocrine insufficiency.",3 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=178049&lang=en
178052,The Role of Cdx in Intestinal Development,Grainger  Stephanie L,"Grainger, Stephanie L",University of Ottawa,Ontario,Canada,200810,33000.0,Doctoral Research Award - PA: Digestive Health (SHOPP),Studentship Programs,Biomedical,Genetics,Anterior-Posterior Patterning; Cdx; Conditional Knock Out Mouse; Development; Endoderm; Gastro-Intestinal Epithelium; Immunohistochemistry; In Situ Hybridization; Molecular Biology; Transcription,"The cells lining the intestinal tract are used by the body to absorb nutrients and eliminate waste. Digestive problems, including Crohn's disease and ulcerative colitis, can occur when these cells are not functioning properly. These diseases afflict millions of Canadians who display symptoms with varying degrees of severity from general discomfort to complete incapacitation. In addition, intestinal cells are constantly shed into the gut lumen, necessitating their constant renewal. An imbalance in the growth and death of these cells can lead to cancer. Indeed, colorectal cancer remains the second leading cause of death from cancer in Canada, resulting in an estimated 20,500 new cases and 8,900 deaths per year. A better understanding of how the growth and maintenance of these cells is regulated is central to advancing strategies for the treatment and cure of these disorders. We can increase our knowledge in this area by a better understanding of the key genes involved in this processes. One approach to this end is to investigate the ramifications of removing one or more key genes from the organism. In this project, we are studying such a mouse model to find out how a family of genes impacts on the growth, development and maintenance of cells in the intestinal tract. To date, we have found that these genes are needed for the cells lining our intestinal tract to develop properly. We also know that without these genes, mice tend to form tumours in their intestines at a much higher rate than normal. We are currently working to find out precisely how these genes are involved in these processes, so that we can direct this information to potential new modalities for treatments and cures.",3 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=178052&lang=en
178054,Elucidation of a factor found in the probiotic strain Lactobacillus helveticus R0052 critical in inhibiting O157:H7 and other Verocytotoxin-producing Escherichia coli (VTEC) infections.,Ho  Nathan K,"Ho, Nathan K",Hospital for Sick Children (Toronto),Ontario,Canada,200810,33000.0,Doctoral Research Award - PA: Digestive Health (SHOPP),Studentship Programs,Biomedical,Infection and Immunity,E. Coli; Ehec; Lactobacillus Helveticus R0052; Probiotic; Protein Expression; Signal Transduction; Surface Plasmon Resonance; Vtec,"Escherichia coli (E. coli) O157:H7 is the leading cause of foodborne or waterborne infections and outbreaks of haemorrhagic colitis in North America, otherwise known as hamburger disease. The Walkerton tragedy is a recent example of an E. coli O157:H7 outbreak. The human immune system is normally capable of fighting off against bacterial infections, however E. coli O157:H7 has the ability to stop the immune system from turning on. This gives the bacteria time to infect, colonize, and cause disease. In certain conditions, death may result from infection from this bacterium. 

Probiotic foods, such as certain yogurts, have been found to help the body defend against E. coli infection by turning on the body's immune system. However, how this is done is currently unknown. Very recent findings in our laboratory have found that certain probiotic bacteria can generate signals that activate the body's immune system to E. coli. 

If we can identify the signals that the probiotics make, it may be possible to harvest them and infuse them into other foods, especially the ones that E. coli tend to be found in. This could help prevent E. coli infections in the future and avoid other potential outbreaks.",3 yrs 0 mth,https://webapps.cihr-irsc.gc.ca/decisions/p/project_details.html?applId=178054&lang=en
